Tissues in Action 33
This tissue provides support and flexibility, allowing parts of the plant like stems and tendrils to bend without breaking.
c. Sclerenchyma
Sclerenchyma cells have thick walls (Fig. 3.8c) due to deposition of lignin, making them hard and strong (forms the woody structure). Most of these cells are dead. This tissue is found in stems, leaf veins, and hard coverings of seeds and nuts, such as coconut husk and walnut shell.
(iii) Conducting tissues — Complex permanent tissues
How does water reach the leaves of tall trees? How does food prepared in leaves reach other parts of the plant?
Plants have specialised conducting tissues called xylem and phloem, together known as complex permanent tissues, because they are made up of different types of cells working together. Xylem (Fig. 3.9a) is the tissue that transports water and minerals from the roots to other parts of the plant. It also provides strength to the plant. Xylem consists of tracheids, vessels, xylem parenchyma and xylem fibres. Tracheids and vessels are tubular and thick-walled.
Xylem parenchyma are the only living component of xylem while trachieds, vessels, and xylem fibres are primarily sclerenchymatous. Unlike the xylem, phloem is mostly made up of living cells (Fig. 3.9b). It consists of sieve tubes, companion cells, phloem parenchyma and phloem fibres. Some cells are long and tubular, joined end to end by perforated walls. These cells form sieve tubes. Sieve tubes transport food from leaves to other parts of the plant.
The cellular functions of the sieve tube cells are regulated by companion cells. Companion cells are specialised parenchyma cells. Main function of companion cells is to monitor loading and unloading of sugars in sieve tubes.
Phloem parenchyma store food materials, and resin, tannins and latex. The sieve tubes are also supported by phloem fibres which are primarily schlerenchymatous and provide strength.
So far, we have studied different types of plant tissues based on their functions — protection, support and conduction. In a plant body, these tissues do not work alone. They are organised together into larger groups called tissue systems.
Plant tissues are organised into three tissue systems (Fig. 3.10) —
1. Dermal tissue system: This forms the outer covering of the plant. It protects the inner parts and reduces water loss.
Epidermal
Ground tissue
Epidermal
Fig. 3.10: Tissue systems in plants
Fig. 3.9: Vascular tissue: (a) xylem, and (b) phloem
Tracheid
Xylem fibre parenchyma
Companion parenchyma
Sieve tube
1. You may have noticed that fibres of coconut husk are hard and brittle, whereas the leaf stalks of coriander are soft and flexible. Find out the reason.
Pause and Ponder
Exploration|Grade 9 34
2. Ground tissue system: This forms the main body of a plant between the dermal and conducting tissues. It includes parenchyma, collenchyma and sclerenchyma.
3. Vascular tissue system: This consists of conducting tissues — xylem and phloem.
Pause and Ponder
2. Why do you think that a thick cuticle on the outer wall of epidermis is advantageous for a plant living in the desert but disadvantageous for a plant living underwater?
3. Once water is absorbed by plant roots, it has to travel against gravity through xylem. How do the ‘dead’ cells of the xylem work together with the living cells of leaves at the top to keep the water moving?
4. What do you think will happen if there were no stomata in the epidermis of the stem or leaves?
3.3 Animal Tissues
Like plants, animal cells also group together and specialised in performing different functions. These groups of similar cells form animal tissues. Let us perform a few simple activities — y Blink your eyes quickly.
y Clench and open your fist.
y Take a deep breath.
y Touch something warm or cold.
Now think, which tissue helps you move? Which tissue enables you to sense heat or cold? Which tissue allows oxygen to enter the blood? Which tissue holds the body together so that the skin does not fall off?
Many such questions can be asked but the answers lie in the diversity of animal tissues, which are specially adapted to perform different functions. It is interesting to understand how the structure of an animal tissue suits its specific function.
Let us explore different kinds of animal tissues. Each tissue performs a specific function.
3.3.1 Epithelial tissues — Structure and functions
Epithelial tissue forms the outer covering of the body (skin) and also lines the internal organs, such as the mouth, lungs, blood vessels and intestine. It is composed of closely packed cells with very little space between them.
This structure prevents the entry of the germs, reduces
Meet the Scientists
Sipra Guha Mukherjee in collaboration with
S. C. Maheshwari made a breakthrough discovery in the area of plant tissue culture.
Their research led to the development of a complete plant through anther culture, using an artificial nutrient medium under controlled laboratory conditions.
This pioneering work greatly contributed to crop improvement and brought significant progress in modern agriculture.
Ready to Go Beyond
In young plants, the outer protective layer is a single-layered epidermis.
As plants grow older, some cells below the epidermis of the stem develop the ability to divide, act as lateral meristematic cells and form the cork cambium. The division of cork cambium cells gives rise to cork cells.
Cork cells are dead, compactly arranged, and contain a substance which makes them impermeable to water and gases. This forms the bark of the tree.
Tissues in Action 35 water loss, and also helps in the absorption, secretion and movement of substances. Different types of epithelial tissues are structurally adapted to perform different functions (Table 3.2).
Study Table 3.2 along with the corresponding diagrams shown in Fig. 3.11 to understand how structure and function of epithelial tissues are related.
Table 3.2: Characteristics of functionally and structurally different epithelial tissues
Function Structure Location in the body
Exchange: Helps in rapid diffusion of liquids and
Single layer of thin, flat cells (Fig.
Lining of the tissue in the blood vessels and
Protection: Protects underlying tissues from mechanical injury, friction and entry of microbes
Many layers of cells; the outer cells are flat and tightly packed (Fig. 3.11b)
Skin, mouth and oesophagus
Secretion: Production and secretion of mucus, enzymes, hormones, sweat
Cells specialised for producing and releasing substances; may be cuboidal or columnar (Fig. 3.11c)
Salivary glands, sweat glands and stomach
Sensory functions: Smell, taste, sound and balance
Specialised receptor cells having hair like cilia (Fig. 3.11d)
Nostrils, taste buds and inner ear
Absorption: Efficient uptake of nutrients, water,
Single layer of tall, pillar- like cells, often with hair-like structure (Fig. 3.11e)
Lining of small intestine
3.3.2 How are various parts connected in our body?
You have read that blood connects different parts of the body by transporting nutrients, gases, hormones, etc.
In the same way, bones connect and support the body from head to toe. A tissue that connects and supports other tissues is called a connective tissue.
Both blood and bones are connective tissues. Though both are connective tissues, they differ in composition and consistency. Blood is fluid, while bone is hard. This difference is due to the matrix, which is watery, soft and jelly-like in blood but hard, solid, and rigid in bones (Fig. 3.12a). Fig. 3.11: Types of epithelial tissues in different parts of the body
Curiosity
Chapter 9
Exploration|Grade 9 36
Activity 3.2: Let us understand further y Recall everyday experiences given in the first column of Table 3.3.
y Write your observations and questions in your notebook.
y Compare your observations with the observations given in Table 3.3.
Table 3.3: Your experiences, observations and questions from daily life
Experiences Observations Questions
When you get a small cut on your skin
Red blood oozes out from the cut.
A clot is formed after some time.
What causes blood to clot?
When you get a skin infection
The area turns red and perhaps slightly swollen. You may have a fever.
When you exercise
You breathe faster. Your face may turn red.
The everyday experiences mentioned above are related to blood and its components.
1. The red colour of blood is due to haemoglobin, an iron-rich protein in the Red Blood Cells (RBCs). RBCs live for about 4 months and are replaced regularly.
2. Platelets help in blood clotting at the site of the injury.
3. During exercise or running, muscles need more oxygen, so breathing becomes faster and blood flow increases (face appears red).
4. White Blood Cells (WBCs) collect at infected areas, causing pus formation and inflammation (causing redness and swelling, and possible pus formation at the infected area).
Fig. 3.12: Types of connective tissues (c) Arrangement of tissues at a joint
Cartilage
Ligament (b) Types of bones
Collar bone
Long bone (a) Components of blood
Platelets (55% of total elements (45% of total
Tissues in Action 37
Functions of other connective tissues as experienced through different actions.
Activity 3.3: Let us perform
1. Perform the actions given in Table 3.4.
2. Record your experiences and compare them with the experiences given in Table 3.4.
3. Study their functions and identify the connective tissues (Fig. 3.12).
Table 3.4: Connective tissues
Action Experience Function Identified connective tissue
Touch your elbow gently
A hard and rigid structure
Gives strength, support and protection (Fig. 3.12b)
Press and fold your ear or gently press your nose and stop
A soft and flexible structure that retains shape
Provides flexibility and cushions the ends of bones for shock absorption
Cartilage (Fig. 3.12c)
Touch your forearm muscles and wiggle your
Feel movement in the forearm even though fingers are far away
Connects muscle to bone, and thus, brings about movement (Fig. 3.12c)
Sit on a chair and move your leg upwards till your knee allows
The joint does not go beyond a limit
Connects bone to bone and provides stability, limits movement, and helps prevent dislocation
Ligament (Fig. 3.12c)
Bones have a rigid matrix containing calcium and phosphorus compounds, giving them strength and rigidity. In contrast, cartilage has a soft, jelly-like matrix, and provides flexibility and cushioning. Other connective tissues include tendons and ligaments. Tendons connect muscles to bones, while ligaments connect bones to bones and prevent excessive movement (Fig. 3.12c).
3.3.3 Can we control movement in our body?
Some movements are under our conscious control, such as running, writing or lifting objects. These are called voluntary movements and are carried out by skeletal muscles (Fig. 3.13), which are attached to the skeleton. They are made up of bundles of long, cylindrical cells called muscle fibres, which are unbranched, multinucleate (having many nuclei) and striated (showing light and dark bands).
Are there involuntary movements in the body? Yes, many body movements occur automatically without conscious control, for example the movement of food in the intestine and the beating of the heart. These are called involuntary movements. The muscles responsible for these
Exploration|Grade 9 38 movements include smooth muscles (Fig. 3.13), which are found in organs like the stomach and intestines. Their cells are spindle-shaped, have a single nucleus and lack striations.
They help in slow, continuous movements like digestion.
The cardiac muscles (Fig. 3.13) are found only in the heart. Their fibres are cylindrical and branched with a single nucleus, and have faint striations. Cardiac muscles work tirelessly and rhythmically, enabling the heart to beat throughout life without fatigue.
3.3.4 How does the body sense, communicate and respond?
Have you noticed how quickly you pull your hand away from something hot, or how you remember the lyrics of a song learned long ago? These actions are controlled by nervous tissue, which forms the body’s control and coordination network. The brain acts as the control centre;
coordinating activities, memory and responses across the body. Muscles, both voluntary and involuntary, cannot function independently. They receive instructions from the nervous tissue. For example, during exercise, the brain signals the heart to beat faster to meet the body’s increased oxygen demand.
The cells of nervous tissue are called neurons (Fig. 3.14)
or nerve cells, which are specialised to receive, process and transmit messages. Each neuron has three main parts — the cell body, which contains the nucleus and controls cell activities; dendrites, which receive signals from other neurons; and an axon, a long fibre that carries messages from the cell and ends at axon terminals. The axon terminals transmit the messages to other cells.
3.4 The Musculoskeletal System
The musculoskeletal system (Fig. 3.15) is made up of bones, muscles, joints, cartilage, tendons and ligaments.
This system helps us stand upright, move, maintain posture and protect delicate organs. The musculoskeletal system functions under the control of the nervous system. Muscles pull on bones to produce movement. They are attached to bones by strong, flexible bands called tendons (Fig. 3.15).
When a muscle contracts, the tendon transmits this force to the bone, resulting in movement at a joint. Have you wondered how much of your body weight comes from bones? On an average, the adult human skeleton makes up about 12 – 15 per cent of body weight, though this can vary with age, gender and body composition.
Fig. 3.15: Musculoskeletal system in human body
Ligament
Cartilage
Fig. 3.13: Different types of muscles
Skeletal muscle
Cardiac muscle
Smooth muscle
Fig. 3.14: Structure of a neuron
Cell body
Dendrites terminals
Tissues in Action 39
Activity 3.4: Let us investigate
What percentage of total body weight comes from bones and muscles?
1. Step on a weighing scale and record your total body weight.
2. Use online references or health resources to find average bone and muscle mass percentage for your age, gender, and an Indian body type (these may vary by ethnicity). For example, on average, adult males have about 40 – 50 per cent muscle, and adult females have ~30 – 40 per cent muscle, although bone mass is about 12 – 15 per cent for all adults.
3. Multiply your total body weight by the bone percentage and muscle percentage to estimate the weight of your bones and muscles.
4. Record the estimated bone weight and muscle weight, and compare them with your total body weight.
5. Compare your findings with those of your classmates and calculate the class average.
Discuss why do bone and muscle mass differ between individuals, and how do they contribute to the overall body weight?
3.4.1 The musculoskeletal system in action
Activity 3.5: Let us observe
Move different parts of your body and observe what movement(s) it can
Table 3.5: Different types of movements our body can make
Complete rotation rotation Bending Turning, side-raising, up-down or any other movement
Elbow No No Yes
Shoulder
You may have noticed that some parts of our body can move easily in many directions, while others move only in a single direction. Why does this happen? The difference is due to the types of joints present. A joint is a junction between two or more bones. Joints allow movement but they cannot move the bones on their own. So, what actually causes the bones to
Exploration|Grade 9 40
3.5 Types of Joints
3.5.1 Ball and socket joint
The shoulder joint allows free movement of the arm (Table 3.5). This is because the rounded top of the upper arm bone fits into a shallow hollow of the shoulder bone, forming the ball and socket joint (Fig. 3.16). Together with the collarbone, the shoulder forms the shoulder girdle, which connects the arm to the skeleton. This joint allows forward, backwards, sideways and circular movements.
3.5.2 Hinge joint
Unlike the shoulder, the elbow bends and straightens in one direction only like a door hinge (Table 3.5). This type of joint is called a hinge joint. A similar hinge joint is present in the knee, where a small bone called the kneecap protects the joint.
3.5.3 Pivot joint
Now, try shaking your head ‘no.’ Place your hand at the back of your neck and feel the gentle movement. How does the neck move so freely? The skull is connected to the backbone through a pivot joint, which allows the head to move side to side like a doorknob turning in its socket.
3.5.4 Fixed joints
The skull is a hard case of flat bones joined together to protect the brain, eyes and ears. The bones of the skull are connected by fixed joints, which means the bones of the skull cannot move. This keeps the brain safe even when the body moves.
Fig. 3.16: Types of joints
Fixed joint
Hinge joints
Ball and socket
Pivot joint
Pause and Ponder
5. Look at the picture given below (Fig. 3.17). Carefully observe the various poses of classical and folk dances of India. Can you identify which joints are involved? Also, what type of movement each joint allows?
Fig. 3.17: Poses of classical and folk dances of India
Ready to Go Beyond
Stem cells in the bone marrow are special cells that can divide and make new cells. In a bone marrow transplant, stem cells from a healthy person are given to patients who have blood cancers like Leukemia or disorders, such as Thalassemia.
Tissues in Action 41
3.6 Skeletal System
The skeletal system consists of a framework of bones that provides strength and protects delicate internal organs. It includes the skull, vertebral column and rib cage. From the base of the skull, it extends a flexible column called the backbone or vertebral column (spine), made up of a series of small bones called vertebrae. It supports the body and helps us stand upright.
Between each vertebra is a cartilage disc, which acts as a cushion and allows flexibility, so we can bend and twist without injuring the internal
