How Forces Affect Motion 99
Fig. 6.13: Force acting on the stack of coins (a) due to the stretched rubber band and friction upon release of rubber band, and (b) only due to friction
Force of friction
Force due to rubber band vanishes and the force applied by the stretched rubber band in the forward direction on the stack of coins sets it moving. The coins start moving means that the force applied by the rubber band is larger than the force of friction and a net force acts on stack of coins in the forward direction (Fig. 6.13a). Due to the net force, the velocity of stack of coins changes from zero to a certain value, i.e., the net force provides an acceleration in the forward direction.
However, the moment the stack of coins loses contact with the rubber band, the force due to the rubber band is no longer acting upon it. But the force of friction continues to act upon the stack of coins in the direction opposite to their motion (Fig. 6.13b). It gradually decreases its velocity and finally brings it to rest.
Even though the rubber band is stretched by the same amount in each case, the distance travelled by the stack of coins on different surfaces changes. This indicates that the force of friction on these surfaces is different. But how can you check if the force of friction is indeed different for different surfaces?
Activity 6.2: Let us measure
1. Take a spring balance and a wooden block.
2. Place the spring balance in a horizontal position on one of the surfaces used in Activity 6.1 and check that its scale reading is zero. Attach the wooden block to the hook of the spring balance as shown in Fig. 6.14.
Fig. 6.14: A block being pulled by a spring balance
3. Pull the spring balance with gradually increasing force and note down the reading on it when the block just starts moving. What does this reading indicate? The forces acting on the block are the force applied by the spring on it and the force of friction. If the velocity of the block is neither increasing nor decreasing, what can you say about the net force acting on the block? Does the reading of the spring balance indicate the magnitude of the force of friction acting on the wooden
4. Now repeat step 3 on the remaining three surfaces from Activity 6.1.
5. Compare the readings of the spring balance for all surfaces. Are the readings different? Is the reading smallest for the surface on which the stack of coins travelled the largest distance? Is the reading largest for which the distance travelled was the smallest?
The reading of the spring balance gives an approximate measure of the force of friction acting between the surface of the block and the surface
100 Exploration|Grade 9 on which it moves. A smaller reading indicates a smaller force of friction, while a larger reading indicates a larger force of friction. From Activities 6.1 and 6.2, we conclude that when the force of friction is smaller, the velocity of the stack of coins decreases more slowly, and it travels a larger distance before coming to rest.
Now, conduct a thought experiment. We do a thought experiment when the conditions required for the experiment are difficult to recreate in the real world. Suppose, you find an object and a horizontal floor having such smooth surfaces that the force of friction between them is zero.
Imagine, what will happen if you repeat steps 3 and 4 of Activity 6.1 with such an object and a horizontal floor? Will the velocity of the object decrease? Will the object ever come to rest or continue moving forever?
Think as a Scientist
Meet a Scientist
In ancient times, it was well recognised that a force was required to move a stationary object or to stop a moving object. But was a force required to keep an object moving with a constant velocity? For ages, it was mistakenly thought that a force was indeed required to maintain an object in such a motion. It was only in the 17th century that Galileo Galilei argued through a series of thought experiments that if a body moves along a horizontal plane and all impediments to its motion are removed, it will continue to move indefinitely.
Meet a Scientist
Isaac Newton used the word ‘inertia’ to describe the tendency of objects to resist change in their state of rest or uniform motion, and used this idea to frame his first law of motion. Along with this, Newton presented two more laws of motion in
1687. The formulation of these three laws of motion was a defining moment in the history of science. The unit of force is named after Newton. Remember that when a unit is named after a person, its full form begins with the small case (newton and not Newton) while its symbol is capitalised (N and not n).
6.4 Newton’s First Law of Motion
Newton’s first law of motion can be stated as:
An object at rest remains at rest, and an object in motion continues to move with a constant velocity, unless a net force acts upon the object.
In other words, we can say that if the net force acting on an object is zero, the body cannot begin to move or change its velocity. In such a case, its acceleration is zero.
An object at rest means that it has zero velocity. Remember that constant velocity means that there is no change in the magnitude or the direction of velocity. If this constant velocity is non-zero, the motion is in a straight line in the same direction and the magnitude of velocity remains the same.
How Forces Affect Motion 101
Example 6.2: A person is exerting a force on a moving box in the forward direction which is equal to the force of friction acting between the bottom surface of the box and the floor. Will the box continue moving or will it come to rest after some time?
Answer: The force of friction will be acting on the box in the backward direction. The two forces acting on the box are equal and opposite, and thus, they balance each other. The net force acting on the box is zero and as per the Newton’s first law of motion, the box will continue moving with constant velocity.
Example 6.3: Draw (i) position-time, and (ii) velocity-time graphs for an object on which no net force is acting.
Answer: When no net force is acting on an object, there are two possibilities — either the object is at rest or the object is moving with a constant velocity. If the object is at rest, its position will not change with time and its position-time graph is as shown in
Fig. 6.15a. Its velocity will remain zero and its velocity-time graph is shown in Fig. 6.15b. If the object is moving with constant velocity and no net force is acting upon it, it will continue moving with the same velocity and the velocity-time graph is shown in Fig. 6.16b. The position-time graph will be a straight line as shown in Fig. 6.16a.
Fig. 6.15: When the object is at rest, its (a) position-time graph, (b) velocity-time graph
Fig. 6.16: When the object is moving with a constant velocity, its (a) position-time graph, (b) velocity-time graph
Velocity
Position
Time 0 Time 0
Velocity
Position
3. An object is moving with a constant velocity. Is there a net force acting upon it?
4. Suppose, no net force is acting on an object. Which of the following situations are possible?
(i) Object remains at rest if at rest.
(ii) Object keeps moving with a constant velocity if already moving.
(iii) Object is moving with a constant acceleration.
5. In the real world, it is difficult to find a situation where no forces are acting on an object. But by applying additional forces, a condition can be achieved where the net force on the object is zero. Explain with the help of an example.
Pause and Ponder
Newton’s first law of motion describes the motion of objects in the absence of a net force. It is natural to ask what happens to the motion of an object when there is a net force acting upon it. Newton’s second law of motion addresses this issue.
If the force of friction is zero, a net force will have to be applied to an object at rest to set it moving. But once the object is moving, no further force is required to keep it moving with a constant velocity.
However, to change the velocity (magnitude or direction), or to stop a moving object, a force will have to be applied.
102 Exploration|Grade 9
6.5 Newton’s Second Law of Motion
You know that a force can set an object in motion, bring it to rest, or change its velocity. A change in velocity means that the object is accelerating. Thus, a force produces acceleration. But what is the relationship between the net force acting on an object and its acceleration?
From our everyday experiences, you know that if a ball is pushed gently, it moves slowly starting from rest, i.e., the acceleration due to the force applied by you is small. On the other hand, a strong push results in the ball starting to move fast, i.e., a larger acceleration due to the force applied by you. So based on your experiences, you can make a hypothesis — for the same object, a larger force results in larger acceleration (or a smaller force results in smaller acceleration).
Now, how can you test your hypothesis? You will have to think of an activity where you can apply forces of different magnitudes on the same object and the same surface to find the resultant acceleration. How can you apply forces of different magnitudes? You have learnt in earlier grade about gravitational force with which the Earth pulls an object towards itself. It is called the weight of an object and is different for different objects. Hence, you can use weights of different magnitudes to apply forces of different magnitudes.
Think as a Scientist
Curiosity
Chapter 5
Activity 6.3: Let us experiment (Demonstration activity)
This activity is recommended to be performed as a classroom group activity facilitated by the teacher.
1. Take four ball bearing wheels, two pencils, an empty cardboard box (to make a cart), a paper cup, a piece of pipe (to use as a pulley), a length of thread, some coins or other objects (to place in cup) and a weighing scale to measure mass.
2. Insert two pencils through the sides of the box near the bottom, to function as axles and attach a wheel to each of their free ends as shown in
Fig. 6.17a (if the wheels are loose, wrap some adhesive tape at the pencil ends to fit the wheels tightly). Attach a thread to the front end of the box with which you can pull the cart.
3. Draw a line at one end of the table, which will mark the starting point for the cart. Put the thread over a small pipe attached at the other end of the table (Fig. 6.17b). To this thread attach a cup in which you can put some objects. As you let the system go, the cup will move down due to the gravitational force by the Earth on it, and the thread will pull the cart with a constant force.
4. Measure the mass of the cup along with any other objects put inside it with the weighing scale.
5. Start recording a video of the cart in slow motion. Release the cart from the start line, and record the video until it reaches the pipe at the other end of the table.
Fig. 6.17: (a) A cart, (b) a cart and pulley system
Cardboard
Thread Pulley
How Forces Affect Motion 103
6. Read the time when you released the cart and when it reached the end of the table by seeing the slow-motion video, and record the difference as time T1.
7. Now double the mass of the cup with the objects inside it, and repeat steps 5 and 6 to record the time difference T2.
Using the values of the time measured, let us do some analysis. For both cases, the cart starts with zero velocity u = 0 and travels the same distance s.
If a1 and a2 are the accelerations in the two cases respectively, using kinematic equation, we obtain s a T = 2
Equating the two equations, we obtain
Substituting the values of T1 and T2 , you find that when you increased the force for the same mass of the cart, the acceleration increased.
You may conclude that the acceleration of an object of fixed mass increases as the net force applied on it increases.
Apart from force, does acceleration depends on any other factor? From everyday experiences, you know that with the same magnitude of force, it is easier to set lighter objects in motion than heavier ones. This leads to a second hypothesis, that for the same force, a smaller mass has a larger acceleration (or a larger mass has a smaller acceleration). Now how can you test your second hypothesis?
Think as a Scientist
Activity 6.4: Let us experiment (Demonstration activity)
This activity is recommended to be performed as a classroom group activity facilitated by the teacher.
1. Repeat Activity 6.3 with a variation. Keep the mass of the cup and objects inside it constant. Double the mass of the cart by adding more objects in it.
2. Measure the mass of the cart along with the objects inside it with a weighing scale.
3. Carry out steps 5 and 6 of Activity 6.3.
Using the values of time measured, find the ratio of acceleration for these two cases. Do you find that for the same force, when you increased the mass of the cart, the acceleration decreased? This means that for a given magnitude of a force, the acceleration produced is inversely related to the mass of the object.
The relation between force, mass and acceleration is expressed in the
Newton’s second law, one of the most fundamental ideas in all of science.
Newton’s second law of motion can be stated as:
When a net force acts on an object, the object accelerates in the direction of the net force. The magnitude of the acceleration is proportional to the magnitude of the net force and is inversely proportional to the mass of the object.
104 Exploration|Grade 9
Mathematically it can be expressed as a m (6.1)
or F = ma (6.2)
where a denotes acceleration, F denotes force, and m denotes mass of the object. The direction of acceleration is the same as the direction of net force.
You know that the SI units of mass and acceleration are kg and m s–2 respectively. If m = 1 kg , a = 1 m s–2, then using Eq. (6.2) we obtain
F = (1 kg) × (1 m s–2) = 1 kg m s–2 = 1 N
One newton of force is defined as the force that produces an acceleration of 1 m s–2 on an object of mass 1 kg.
You know that under the influence of gravitational force, an object falls towards the Earth. During this motion, the acceleration involved is called the acceleration due to the gravitational force by the Earth and is denoted by g . Its unit is the same as that of acceleration, m s–2.
Using Eq. (6.2), the gravitational force acting on an object of mass m is
F = mg (6.3)
The value of acceleration due to gravitational force by the Earth is g = 9.8 m s–2. It can be taken to be nearly constant near the surface of the Earth. For quick estimations, one can also take g = 10 m s–2.
Threads of Curiosity
As per Eq. (6.1), in Activity 6.3, doubling the force on the cart should have doubled the acceleration you measured. But in reality, you may have found the increase to be little less than a factor of two.
Similarly in Activity 6.4, when you doubled the mass of the cart, the acceleration should have been halved but you might have found a slightly different value. Apart from measurement errors, the friction between the cart’s wheels and the surface can lead to such differences.
The more complete form of Newton’s second law is expressed in terms of momentum. The momentum of an object is defined as the product of its mass and velocity. The direction of the momentum is same as that of the velocity. Newton’s second law states that the rate of change of momentum of an object is proportional to the net force and takes place in the direction in which the net force acts. Newton’s second law expressed in this form is applicable to situations even where the mass of the object is not constant.
Ready to Go Beyond
Newton’s second law of motion is considered to be a fundamental law of nature. Many events around us can be explained on the basis of
Newton’s second law of motion.
In a game of cricket, you might have noticed that while catching a fast-moving ball, the fielder gradually pulls their hands backwards with the moving ball just after catching it (Fig. 6.18). In doing so, the time duration is increased during which the high velocity of the ball reduces to zero. This reduces the magnitude of the acceleration of the Fig. 6.18: Catching a cricket ball
How much does a force of 1 N feel? If you hold a 100 g mass in your palm, the upward force your palm applies on the mass is around 1 N.
Threads of
Curiosity
The acceleration due to gravitational force by the Earth ( g) does not depend on the mass of the object.
How Forces Affect Motion 105 ball as it slows down, thus requiring a smaller force to be applied by the fielder to stop the ball. Applying a smaller force to the moving ball also minimises injury to the fielder.
For a similar reason, airbags are provided in vehicles (Fig. 6.19). In the event of a collision and the vehicle coming to an abrupt halt, the airbag inflates quickly into a soft compressible cushion. Instead of directly hitting the hard steering wheel or dashboard, the passenger’s head and chest push into the bag, and the time over which the hitting occurs increases. Smaller acceleration means a reduced force exerted on the person, thereby lowering the risk of serious injuries, particularly when combined with the seat belt usage.
Bridging Science and Society
Fig. 6.19: Inflated airbag in a vehicle
Fig. 6.20: Cracking a coconut in one go
Have you ever attempted cracking a fresh coconut in one go? It is brought down at a very high velocity to hit a hard surface (Fig. 6.20). When the coconut hits the ground, it stops in a very short time. To change its velocity so quickly, the ground must exert a very large force on it. This large force breaks the
Example 6.4: A weight lifter is holding a barbell with mass of 10 kg fixed on each side of the bar (Fig. 6.8). The mass of the bar itself is 10 kg. How much force is she applying to keep the barbell steady?
Answer: The total mass of the barbell is 30 kg. The gravitational force due to the Earth, acting on the barbell in the downward direction is (using Eq. 6.3),
F = mg
