Sound Waves: Characteristics and Applications 189
Fig. 10.9: Density of air in a tube with a piston (a) Piston not oscillating (average air density in the entire tube)
(b) Forward motion of piston produces a compression (region of air with a higher density)
(c) Backward motion of piston produces a rarefaction (region of air with a lower density)
(d) Oscillating piston produces alternate compressions and rarefactions
You observe regions in the slinky where its turns are closer together than usual, and other regions where they are more spread out. These closely spaced and spread out regions appear to travel along the slinky.
However, the mark does not travel along the slinky, it only oscillates about its position of rest parallel to the direction of the disturbance. Each turn oscillates about its own position while the disturbance travels from one end of the slinky to the other.
Sound moves in a similar way through a medium. In our analogy, the closeness or spreading out of the turns of the slinky represents the higher or lower density of air through which sound is travelling. Let us consider a long tube filled with air that has a piston at one end and is open at the other. The piston can be made to oscillate back and forth inside the tube.
Here, the oscillating piston is used as a simple and idealistic model of the source of sound to help understand how sound travels through air.
When the piston is not oscillating, the air inside the tube has a certain uniform density, which we call the average density (Fig. 10.9a), where the dots represent the air particles. As the piston moves forward, it pushes and displaces the nearby air particles in a forward direction, thereby compressing the air and increasing its density in a small region close to the piston (Fig. 10.9b). This region of air with higher density (compared to the average density) is called a compression (C).
The compressed air particles collide with the particles further ahead passing the compression forward. The compressed particles further collide with their neighbouring particles, and so on. As a result, the higher density compression moves forward through the air even though the air particles themselves do not travel with it.
As the piston moves backwards, the air particles move backwards in the direction of the piston and the air in a small region close to the piston becomes less dense (Fig. 10.9c). This region of air with lower density (compared to the average density) is called a rarefaction (R). Again, due to collisions with nearby particles, the rarefaction moves ahead while the particles themselves oscillate only about their mean positions.
As the piston oscillates in forward and backward directions, compressions and rarefactions are produced alternately (Fig. 10.9d). These travel away from the source, and a series of compression and rarefaction are produced.
The disturbance consisting of a series of alternating compressions and rarefactions propagating through a medium, without the actual flow of the particles of medium, is called a sound wave. The direction in which the wave travels is known as the direction of propagation of the wave.
The particles of the medium do not travel with the wave.
They just vibrate about their mean positions.
190 Exploration|Grade 9
When the medium is not confined to a tube, its vibrating particles collide with the surrounding particles in all directions, and thus, the sound wave spreads out in all directions. A small sound source continuously producing sound in all directions causes compressions and rarefactions that spread through the surrounding medium in all directions as spherical waves (Fig. 10.10).
When they reach the listener, they are perceived as sound.
Ready to Go Beyond
Fig. 10.10: Sound from a point source propagates in all directions as spherical waves
Threads of Curiosity
What causes sudden loud sounds, such as when firecrackers explode or during a clap of thunder? These sounds are produced in a slightly different way. When air or gases are heated rapidly, they expand very rapidly in a short time. This rapid expansion creates a sudden disturbance in the air density that travels outward. When this disturbance reaches our ears, we perceive it as a loud sound pulse.
A similar but more complex disturbance is produced when a supersonic aircraft (Fig. 10.11) flies at a speed higher than the speed of sound, creating a loud sound known as a sonic boom.
Fig. 10.11: A supersonic aircraft
Did you notice (Fig. 10.9) that the displacement of the medium is parallel to the direction of wave propagation? In sound waves, the particles of the medium vibrate back and forth parallel to the direction of propagation of disturbance (Fig. 10.12). Such waves where the particles vibrate in a direction parallel to the direction of the wave propagation are known as longitudinal waves.
Direction of particle vibration
Direction of wave propagation
Fig. 10.12: A longitudinal wave
If there is no medium (i.e., no particles), is the propagation of sound waves possible? Without a material medium, sound waves cannot propagate. Waves that require a material medium for propagation are called mechanical waves. Sound wave is a type of a mechanical wave.
Sound Waves: Characteristics and Applications 191
Mechanical waves are of two types:
longitudinal waves and transverse waves.
Sound wave is an example of a longitudinal wave where the particles vibrate parallel to the direction of the wave propagation. In a transverse wave, the particles vibrate in a direction perpendicular to the direction of wave propagation (Fig. 10.13).
Earthquakes produce seismic waves that travel through the Earth. These waves could be longitudinal or transverse. The longitudinal seismic waves are the first to be detected by seismographs that detect the earthquakes.
Not all waves are mechanical waves, i.e., not all waves need a medium to propagate. Light, which is a transverse wave, can travel through vacuum. This is why light from the Sun and other stars can reach the Earth. You will study waves in more detail in higher grades.
Ready to Go Beyond
Fig. 10.13: Transverse Wave
Direction of particle vibration Direction of wave propagation
4. Assertion (A): Compressions and rarefactions move through the medium.
Reason (R): Individual particles of the medium continuously move forward with the wave.
Choose the correct statement:
(i) Both A and R are true, but R is not the correct explanation of A.
(ii) Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A.
(iii) A is true, but R is false.
(iv) A is false, but R is true.
Pause and Ponder
10.4 Energy of Sound Waves
Activity 10.6: Let us experiment
1. Take a wide mouthed container, a cellophane or rubber sheet (such as that of a balloon) of size larger than its opening, a loud sound source (such as a metal plate and a beater) and some grains or particles (such as rice, semolina, salt, or chalk powder).
2. Stretch the sheet over the edges of the container tightly and fix it with tape or a rubber band (Fig. 10.14).
3. Sprinkle the grains evenly over the sheet, ensuring they are not clumped together.
4. Produce a loud sound near the bowl without touching it. Observe the grains on the sheet.
Does the sound have any effect on the grains?
Fig. 10.14: Sound moving grains (coloured)
192 Exploration|Grade 9
5. Repeat step 4 with different sources of sounds and observe the effect on the grains. You can try increasing or reducing the volume of sound.
Try with different grains.
Do you observe the grains over the sheet move or jump? Why does this happen, even though the source of sound is not touching the sheet or the container? As sound propagates through air, it reaches the sheet and makes it vibrate. This vibration causes the grains to move.
This shows that sound is a form of energy. When the source of sound vibrates, it transfers energy to the surrounding medium. As sound waves propagate in a medium, the vibration of particles of the medium and their collisions with other particles result in the transfer of energy.
Microphones (Fig. 10.15a) that help us capture sound from various sources convert sound energy to electrical energy. When we speak or sing into a microphone, the sound waves make a thin membrane, called a diaphragm, vibrate. These vibrations are converted into an electrical signal. A speaker (Fig. 10.15b) does the opposite; an electrical signal makes a cone or diaphragm attached inside the speaker vibrate, which produces sound. If all components work properly, the sound from the speaker closely matches the originally captured sound.
Bridging Science and Society
Fig. 10. 15: (a) A microphone, (b) a speaker
Pause and Ponder
5. When sound travels from a tuning fork to your ear, which of the following actually reaches your ear?
(i) Air particles near the tuning fork (ii) Energy carried by sound waves (iii) The tuning fork material (iv) A continuous stream of compressed air
10.5 Graphical Representation of a Sound Wave
As a sound wave propagates, at any given instant of time the density of the medium varies periodically with distance from the source. Fig. 10.16a shows the periodic variation of density with distance at any given instant of time. The graph corresponding to it is shown in Fig. 10.16b where the distance is plotted on the x-axis, while the density of the medium is plotted on the y-axis. The average density is marked as a horizontal dashed line.
The density varies (above and below the average density) with distance at a given instant of time.
propagation of a sound wave, it is the energy that is transferred, not the particles of the medium.
Particles in a medium are never truly at rest. They are always randomly vibrating due to thermal energy.
When a sound wave passes through the medium, it temporarily increases the vibration of these particles. After the wave passes, the particles return to their usual random motion.
Ready to Go
Sound Waves: Characteristics and Applications 193
Another way to make a graphical representation of a sound wave is to plot the variation of density of the medium with time, at a particular location in the medium.
Ready to Go Beyond
In the region of a compression, the density of the medium increases above the average density and the highest point represents the maximum density (Fig. 10.16b). Thereafter, the density decreases and eventually falls below the average density in the region of rarefaction and the lowest point represents the minimum density. The highest point is called the crest and the lowest point is called the trough of the wave.
6. The variation of density of the medium for two sound waves is shown in Fig. 10.17 (a)
and (b). Label compression and rarefaction by C and R on it. In the graph given in Fig. 10.17 (c) and (d), label the axes and draw the curves corresponding to Fig. 10.17 (a) and (b).
Pause and Ponder
Fig. 10.17: Drawing graph to represent the variation of density of the medium for two sound waves
Fig. 10.16: For a sound wave (a) variation of density of medium, (b) graphical representation of variation of density with distance
Above average density
Below average density
Average density
Distance
C R C R C R
Crest Crest
Trough Trough
194 Exploration|Grade 9
10.6 Characteristics of a Sound Wave
10.6.1 Wavelength, frequency and time period
Let us learn about some quantities which are used to describe a sound wave. The distance between the two consecutive crests or two consecutive troughs is called the wavelength of a wave. This is shown in Fig. 10.18 where two sound waves are shown with long and short wavelengths. The wavelength is usually represented by
λ (Greek letter lambda). Its SI unit is the metre (m).
Another characteristic of sound wave is how often the density variations occur at a given position in the medium when a sound wave passes through that position. The density of the medium at the given position changes alternately between a maximum density (crest) and a minimum density (trough). The change in the density of the medium at a fixed point, from maximum to minimum and then again to maximum (or vice versa), makes one complete oscillation.
The number of density oscillations at a fixed point per unit time is the frequency of the sound wave. It is usually represented by
ν (Greek letter nu). Its SI unit is per second ( or s–1) also called a hertz (symbol Hz).
The time taken for one complete density oscillation at a fixed point is defined as the time period of the wave. The time period of the wave is represented by the symbol T. Its SI unit is second (s).
The time period and frequency are inversely related; a shorter time period corresponds to a higher frequency.
ν = 1 (10.1)
Usually, everyday sounds contain a mixture of many frequencies.
Nearly single frequency sounds can be made by striking a tuning fork (Section 10.1.1) or by oral whistling.
Activity 10.7: Let us experiment (demonstration activity)
This activity is recommended to be performed as a classroom group activity facilitated by the teacher.
1. Use a mobile app, such as Phyphox that can identify frequencies of sounds. Use the ‘Audio Spectrum’ option that displays the frequency graphically or in hertz (Hz).
2. Try to sing the musical notes ‘Sa, Re, Ga, Ma, Pa, Dha, Ni, Sa’ one after another, or use a music or tone generating app on another phone to produce those notes. Observe how the frequency changes as each note is produced.
3. Record the approximate frequency values for each musical
4. Compare the musical notes by taking the ratio of each frequency with respect to the ‘Sa’. Do you observe any pattern?
5. If both voice and mobile-generated notes are used, compare their frequencies for the same musical notes.
Fig. 10.18: Sound waves (b) Short wavelength
C R C R C R C R C R C R
Distance (a) Long wavelength
Distance
Threads of
Curiosity
There are some free apps which can be used by the teacher to produce as well as identify the sounds of different frequencies.
Phyphox is one such app. In fact, using the ‘Audio Scope’ in the Phyphox app and whistling carefully will often produce a graph like Fig. 10.18 indicating that it is almost a single frequency sound.
Sound Waves: Characteristics and Applications 195
Distance
Amplitude
Distance
Amplitude
C R C R C R C R C R C R
Fig. 10.20: Sound waves (a) Low amplitude (b) High amplitude
In this activity, you would have noticed that the frequency is lowest for the ‘Sa’ and gradually increases for the other notes. Each musical note has a distinct frequency, which makes it sound different. You can use the app to compare the frequencies of other sounds, including the voices of your friends too.
Example 10.1: If there are 10 density oscillations in 2 seconds at a given position, then calculate the (i) frequency of sound wave, and (ii) its time
Answer: number of oscillations 10
Frequency of sound wave = = = 5 Hz time taken 2 s
Time taken for a single density oscillation at a position = 2 s = 0.2 s
7. Conduct Activity 10.1 once again with a thick rubber band and then with a thin rubber band. Does the thin rubber band vibrate faster than the thick rubber band? If yes, how do the frequency and time period of the sound produced by the thin rubber band differ from that of the thick rubber band?
8. If the frequency of a sound wave produced by an oscillating piston of a long tube filled with air is
20 Hz, then how many oscillations does the piston complete per minute?
9. For the sound wave represented by the graph shown in Fig. 10.19, what is half of its wavelength?
Pause and Ponder
Distance (cm)
0 1.5 3.0 4.5
Fig. 10.19: Graphical representation of a sound wave
10.6.2 Amplitude and intensity of the sound waves
Sound propagates as density oscillations of the medium via compressions and rarefactions.
The amplitude of a sound wave is the maximum change in the density of air in a compression (or a rarefaction) compared to the average density. A larger change in density corresponds to a larger amplitude (Fig. 10.20).
The amplitude and the amount of energy a wave carries are related. A wave with a larger amplitude carries more energy than the one with a smaller amplitude. This can be seen in Activity 10.6. When the plate is struck harder, more energy is transferred to the particles of surrounding medium, causing larger displacements from their mean positions. As a result, the sheet vibrates to a larger displacement and the grains jump higher.
The amount of sound energy passing through a unit area perpendicular to the direction of the propagation of sound wave in a unit time is called the intensity of sound.
196 Exploration|Grade 9
As sound wave travels away from its source, it spreads over a larger area (Fig. 10.21). Since the energy must be conserved, the same amount of energy is now spread over a larger area. Hence, the intensity decreases with distance from the source. Sounds produced with initial larger amplitude carry more energy and can travel a larger distance before intensity reduces to zero.
10.6.3 Speed of Sound
The speed of sound describes how fast sound waves propagate through a medium. In terms of compressions and rarefactions, one can think of speed as how fast these density disturbances propagate through the medium. The speed of sound can be defined as the distance which a point on a wave, such as a crest (or a trough), travels in unit time.
For a sound wave of given frequency, the distance between two consecutive crests (or two consecutive troughs) is one wavelength (
λ ). This distance is covered by the disturbance in one time period (T ). Therefore, the speed of sound (v ) is distance speed = time ⇒ v T
We know that frequency T
ν = 1 (Eq. 10.1). Thus,
λ ν × v = (10.2)
speed = wavelength × frequency
The speed of sound depends on the medium through which it travels. It travels fastest in solids, slower in liquids, and slowest in gases.
For example, sound travels about 4 – 5 times faster in water and typically
15 – 20 times faster in solids than in the air.
The speed of sound in air also depends on the tem
