233 Patterns in Life: Diversity and Classification
6. It allows scientists all over the world to discuss about organisms using a common system.
12.5 Biological Classification Systems Over Time
In the previous section, you have learnt to identify various criteria for classifying the huge biodiversity in the world. Scientists have developed different classification systems over time, based on the knowledge available.
Aristotle, around the 4th century BCE, grouped animals based on their habitat — land, water and air. He also grouped them based on their external appearances. However, this system had limitations because it relied mainly on easily observable external characteristics.
In the 18th century, scientists introduced the two kingdom system. All living organisms were divided into Plantae and Animalia.
Plantae — organisms that do not move from one place to another and synthesise their own food.
Animalia — organisms that move from one place to another and depends on other organisms for food.
But this system created confusion. Where should organisms like Amoeba, Paramecium and bacteria be placed? Amoeba and Paramecium move like animals but are unicellular and heterotrophic.
However, plants and animals are multicellular organisms. To address this, scientists added a third kingdom, Protista, to include unicellular microscopic organisms.
As microscopes improved, scientists noticed an important difference. An amoeba has a true nucleus (membrane-bound) but bacteria do not.
Since both are unicellular but very different, bacteria were placed in a separate kingdom called the Monera. This led to a four kingdom classification system — Plantae, Animalia, Protista and Monera. The kingdom Protista includes mostly unicellular organisms with a true nucleus. Later, scientists noticed that fungi like mushrooms, do not move like plants but have a heterotrophic mode of nutrition. They obtain nutrients by absorption, many absorb nutrients from dead and decaying matter (though some are symbiotic and some are parasitic). Therefore, fungi were placed in a separate kingdom. This resulted in the five kingdom classification, which includes Monera,
Protista, Fungi, Plantae and Animalia (Fig. 12.4).
12.6 Five Kingdom Classification
In the five kingdom classification, all life forms are grouped based on certain common features.
The Rigveda and the Brihat Samhita classify animals on the basis of their habitat (terrestrial, aquatic and aerial), behaviour patterns and ecological roles.
India’s Scientific
Contributions
Fig. 12.4: Timeline of the classification systems
Robert H.
Whittaker
Five Kingdom
Grouped life into
Monera, Protista,
Fungi, Plantae,
Animalia
Four Kingdom
Grouped life into
Monera, Protista,
Plantae, Animalia
Three Kingdom
Added Protista for microscopic life
Two Kingdom
Divided life into
Plantae, Animalia
Artificial System
Grouped animals by habitat — land, water and air
4th century BCE
Herbert F.
Copeland
Linnaeus
Aristotle
Textbook of Science for Grade 9 234
Activity 12.3: Let us study
1. Study the concept map (Fig. 12.5).
2. List the criteria which form the basis of five kingdom classification.
Ecological role
Classification of Living Organisms
Prokaryotes
Cell type
Unicellular
Level of organisation
With cell wall
Cell structure
Chitin Cellulose Heterotrophic
Consumers
Animalia
Without cell wall
Heterotrophic
Decomposers
Mode of nutrition
Autotrophic
Producers
Multicellular
Protista
Eukaryotes (Bacteria, Archaea,
Cyanobacteria)
(May or may not have a cell wall)
(Process of photosynthesis)
Fig. 12.5: Five kingdom classification
Mushroom Yeast
Aspergillus (Amoeba,
Paramecium,
Chlamydomonas,
Euglena)
Primitive nucleus (Unbounded membrane)
(Depend on others for
Membrane-bound
Mosses Grasses Ferns
Pines Roses
Bird Cat Human
Ant Snake Frog (Depend on others for food)
3. Compare the criteria you have listed after studying the concept map and the criteria given below:
y Cell type — prokaryote or eukaryote y Cell structure — presence or absence of a cell wall
235 Patterns in Life: Diversity and Classification y Level of organisation — unicellular or multicellular y Mode of nutrition — autotrophic or heterotrophic
12.6.1. Kingdom Monera — Unicellular prokaryotes
Activity 12.4: Let us explore
1. In the school laboratory, observe the available permanent slides of bacteria and cyanobacteria under the microscope.
2. Compare them with Fig. 12.6.
What do you observe? Bacteria and cyanobacteria are single-celled prokaryotes that are grouped under Monera (Fig. 12.6). Bacteria are found everywhere, including soil, water, air, hot springs and other extreme environments where most organisms cannot survive and they are present even inside the human bodies. They are also found in the gut of ruminants and are responsible for the production of biogas from the dung of these animals. Some bacteria are harmful (pathogens) and cause diseases but many are useful like Lactobacillus and Rhizobium. Cyanobacteria are autotrophs and decomposers. In addition to nutrient cycling, some bacteria also break down pollutants like oil, pesticides, sewage, and so on.
Bridging Science and Society
Ram Bux Singh is popularly known as the ‘Father of
Modern Biogas’. He was a pioneering Indian scientist who contributed to the development of biogas technology. In 1957, he established India’s first scientifically designed biogas plant at Ramnagar, Sitapur, Uttar Pradesh, which marked the beginning of systematic modern biogas research in the country. He later worked extensively on developing low-cost, efficient biogas plants for rural areas. He also served as an international consultant and helped set up biogas plants in several countries. His lifelong efforts played a crucial role in promoting renewable energy, waste management and sustainable development through technology.
12.6.2 Kingdom Protista — Unicellular eukaryotes
All single-celled eukaryotes without cell wall or with cell wall made up of cellulose are grouped under the kingdom protista. They are microscopic and highly diverse organisms. You can study some of these protists (Fig. 12.7) by making a slide from hay infusion as explained below.
Activity 12.5: Let us make
To make a hay infusion, follow the steps given below —
1. Collect a small sample of grass after the lawn has been mowed, or collect straw or fodder.
2. Take a small glass bottle and fill one fourth of it with the grass, straw or fodder.
3. Fill the bottle with stagnant water or pond water and mix it with the collected plant material.
4. Cover the bottle with a muslin cloth and tie it using a thread.
5. Keep the bottle aside undisturbed for a week.
Fig. 12.6 Members of the Kingdom Monera
Amoeba Euglena Paramecium
Fig. 12.7: Microscopic illustration of common protists
Cyanobacteria (blue-green algae)
were among the first organisms to produce oxygen through photosynthesis.
About 2.5 billion years ago, oxygen accumulated in the atmosphere, made the Earth suitable for other forms of life.
Fossils of ancient cyanobacteria are found in structures called stromatolites.
They were found in Rajasthan and
Madhya Pradesh.
They provide some of the earliest evidence of life on the Earth.
Threads of
Curiosity
Textbook of Science for Grade 9 236
6. Slightly open the mouth of the bottle by removing the muslin cloth, just enough to insert a dropper inside it and carefully take a drop of water.
7. Put the drop of water on a clean slide and observe it under a microscope.
Caution: The hay infusion may smell bad. Therefore, take precaution during lab exercises.
y Wear a lab coat, mask and hand gloves.
y Discard the hay infusion after autoclaving.
Do you notice moving organisms in the drop of water under the microscope? Can you identify them by comparing them with Fig. 12.7?
Protista includes single-celled eukaryotic organisms that live in water or moist places (Fig. 12.7). Some are autotrophic and others are heterotrophic. Protists are an important link in aquatic food chains, some produce oxygen while others serve as food for small animals. Some protists function as decomposers and help in nutrient cycling.
12.6.3 Kingdom Fungi — Multicellular, heterotrophic eukaryotes with a cell wall
Fungi are mostly multicellular eukaryotes with cell walls made of chitin.
They do not make their own food. They either absorb nutrients from dead or decaying matter through fine filaments (which together form a network known as mycelium). Most of the fungi are saprophytes and therefore, they play a very important ecological role as decomposers, that means, they feed on dead organic matter, such as fallen leaves, twigs or dead organisms. They break down the complex organic matter into simpler substances and make them readily available in soil as minerals.
Some of the fungi establish a mutualistic (symbiotic) relationship with other organisms while others live as parasites, and cause diseases in plants and animals. They reproduce both sexually and asexually, often by forming spores, and grow best in warm and moist conditions.
Yeast (Fig. 12.8a) and Aspergillus mould are common fungi. However, yeast is a unicellular organism, since its cell wall is made up of chitin, it has been put under fungi. Mushrooms (Fig. 12.8c) are macroscopic fungi that reproduce by spores. Some fungi like Aspergillus (Fig. 12.8b)
and Penicillium are used to make enzymes and antibiotics. Fungi are important decomposers and help recycle nutrients. Without them, the decay of dead plants and animals would be greatly reduced, adversely affecting the soil fertility and ecological balance.
Wild edible mushrooms are a valuable dietary food with high nutritional and medicinal values.
They are important forest resources used and conserved by many communities, including tribal communities in India. These communities possess traditional knowledge about the edible and poisonous mushrooms based on folk taxonomy. Some wild mushrooms are used as sources of food and some as medicine for treating various ailments. Nowadays, mushroom cultivation is becoming a promising vocation for livelihood. Mushroom farming is easy and accessible due to its minimal space requirement, low investment and fast life cycle (30 – 45 days).
Bridging Science and Society (c) Mushrooms
Fig. 12.8: Common fungi
Aspergillus (a) Yeast
2. How can a single-celled organism carry out all its life processes when billions of cells are required to perform similar functions in multicellular organisms like
Pause and
237 Patterns in Life: Diversity and Classification
12.6.4 Kingdom Plantae — Multicellular, autotrophic eukaryotes with a cell wall
Plants are multicellular, autotrophic organisms that perform photosynthesis.
Their cells have a rigid cell wall primarily made up of cellulose, which provides support and protection. All plants belong to the kingdom Plantae.
Plants form the base of most of the food chains and release oxygen which is essential for life on the Earth. Kingdom Plantae is further divided into five classes.
Thallophyta Bryophyta Pteridophyta Gymnosperm Angiosperm
Thallophyta (algae) — Primitive plants
Thallophytes (thallos means undifferentiated body and phyton means plant) are among the simplest plant forms and are mostly found in water or moist environments. They form a thallus, a simple body that allows direct exchange of gases, nutrients and water with the surroundings. They are well-adapted to aquatic habitats. An example of Thallophyta is Spirogyra (Fig. 12.9).
Bridging Science and Society
Have you ever seen white-green patches on the tree trunk, damp walls or stones? What do you think about these patches? Visit a village and talk to an elderly person about these patches. They recognise these patches as an indicator of a pollution-free environment. In fact, the lichens change their colour with air pollutants. Based on their colour, researchers can find out the concentration of pollutants in the air. Therefore, they are natural bioindicators for the measurement of air quality. Villagers also collect these as forest produce for utilisation in their daily life. Some types of lichen, commonly called patthar ke phool are used as a spice, while some are used as medicines, and also for making dyes since ancient times to give maroon, violet, or burgundy colour to woollen and silk fabrics. Biologically, these are symbiotic (mutual associations of two organisms) — one partner is an autotrophic alga and the other one is a heterotrophic fungus. Fungal partners provide protection, and algal partners photosynthesise and provide food. Some lichens are poisonous, so it is important to classify and identify them properly for safe and proper utilisation.
Bryophyta — First steps on land, still need water
Bryophytes (bryon means moss and phyton means plant), such as mosses and liverworts (Fig. 12.10), which represents an important shift from water to land. You might have seen them as large green mats on damp rocks or even on the walls of some old buildings, or even on soil surfaces as green mats.
Bryophytes have a more differentiated body as compared to thallophytes.
They have root-like structures called rhizoids, and may possess stem-like and leaf-like simple structures. Bryophytes survive in moist and shady places, growing as green mats on the soil, especially during the monsoons.
Examples of Bryophytes include Marchantia and moss (Fig. 12.10).
Curiosity
Chapter 10
Fig. 12.9: Spirogyra
Fig. 12.10: Members of class Bryophyta (a) Marchantia (b) Moss
Textbook of Science for Grade 9 238
Activity 12.6: Let us explore
1. Observe some bryophytes with the help of a hand lens. Collect them in a watch glass.
2. Put a drop of water on it and observe it under a dissecting microscope. A dissecting microscope enables us to view magnified images of live specimens.
How do they differ from the leaves that you usually observe in plants in your surroundings?
Bryophytes require water for reproduction. Therefore, they are called the ‘amphibians’ of the plant kingdom. They show how plants began to colonise land, while remaining dependent on moisture.
Pteridophyta — Adaptation to land and having structural transport system
Look at Fig. 12.11a. What changes do you observe in the plant structure as compared to thallophytes and bryophytes?
Pteridophytes (pteris derived from pteron means feather and phyton means plant), such as ferns, possess true roots, stems and leaves. How do you think that the transport of water and food takes place in all parts of these plants? One possible explanation is that ferns have specialised transport tissue. How can you test this explanation? A cross section of the stem of a fern can be cut and seen under a microscope. You may also observe a permanent slide of a cross section of a fern stem available in your school laboratory. The cross section shows vascular tissues, xylem and phloem, which transport water and food, respectively, throughout the plant (Fig. 12.11b). Pteridophytes require aquatic conditions for reproduction and do not produce seeds.
Activity 12.7: Let us compare
1. Recall the cross section of the sunflower stem you have studied in Chapter 3 (Fig. 3.7).
2. Compare the cross section of the stem of a fern, a pteridophytic plant (Fig. 12.11) with a cross section of sunflower stem you studied in Chapter 3 (Fig. 3.7).
3. What difference do you observe in the vascular tissue of the fern stem and of the stem of higher plants? Write your observations. Share and discuss them in class.
Gymnosperms — Reproduction without water
Gymnosperms (gymnos means naked and spermos means seed), such as pines (Fig. 12.12) and cycads are well-adapted to cold and dry regions. Their needle-like or scale-like leaves reduce water loss and withstand harsh conditions. They produce seeds, which protect the developing embryo and contain stored food. Gymnosperms do not require aquatic conditions for fertilisation. Their seeds are not enclosed in fruits and are often exposed on cones.
Fig. 12.11: (a) Fern, and (b) cross section of a fern stem
Fig. 12.12: Cone of pine
3. Which plant features reduce their dependence on water but still require moist conditions?
4. Why do taller plants need specialised transport tissues?
5. How do seeds and fruits affect, where and how plants can survive?
Pause and
239 Patterns in Life: Diversity and Classification
Angiosperms — Efficient reproduction and seed dispersal
Angiosperms (angeion means vessel and spermos means seeds)
or flowering plants, represent plants with the most complex body organisation.
They produce flowers and fruits (Fig. 12.13). Flowers attract pollinators, increasing the efficiency of reproduction, while fruits help spread seeds to new locations. These features allow angiosperms to occupy a wide range of environments. Therefore, they are the most diverse plant group on the Earth.
Activity 12.8: Let us discuss
Collect different leaves from your surroundings, and observe their shape and venation. Group them as monocots or dicots. Discuss how their structures help them adapt in different conditions to survive.
One of the earliest scientific books on Indian plants, Hortus Malabaricus, was compiled in the 17th century by Hendrik van Rheede with the help of Itty Achudan (an Indian Herbalist,
Botanist and Physician) and other local experts. It describes hundreds of plant species and their medicinal uses, showing how traditional knowledge and science can work together.
Bridging Science and Society
Different plant groups present different ways of solving problems, each with advantages and challenges or exceptions for survival.
Activity 12.9: Let us study
1. Carefully study the salient features of each plant group.
2. Analyse the salient features, and write the advantages for survival of the group and the exceptions or challenges faced in the given columns.
Table 12.3: Classes of Kingdom Plantae with their advantages and challenges
Plant groups and salient features Advantages of the group for survival
Exceptions/
Challenges
Thallopyta y Their body is like a thallus which facilitates ea
