silk roAd 65
4. Tsetan’s support to the author during the journey.
5. “As a Buddhist, he told me, he knew that it didn’t really matter if I passed away, but he thought it would be bad for business.”
Talking about the text
Discuss in groups of four
1. The sensitive behaviour of hill-folk.
2. The reasons why people willingly undergo the travails of difficult journeys.
3. The accounts of exotic places in legends and the reality.
Thinking about language
1. Notice the kind of English Tsetan uses while talking to the author. How do you think he picked it up?
2. What do the following utterances indicate?
(i) “I told her, through Daniel …” (ii) “It’s a cold,” he said finally through Tsetan.
3. Guess the meaning of the following words.
kora drokba kyang
In which language are these words found?
Working with words
1. The narrative has many phrases to describe the scenic beauty of the mountainside like:
A flawless half-moon floated in a perfect blue sky.
Scan the text to locate other such picturesque phrases.
2. Explain the use of the adjectives in the following phrases.
(i) shaggy monsters (ii) brackish lakes (iii) rickety table (iv) hairpin bend (v) rudimentary general stores
Reprint 2026-27
66 H ornbill
Noticing form
1. The account has only a few passive voice sentences. Locate them. In what way does the use of active voice contribute to the style of the narrative.
2. Notice this construction: Tsetan was eager to have them fixed. Write five sentences with a similar structure.
Things to do
“The plateau is pockmarked with salt flats and brackish lakes, vestiges of the Tethys Ocean which bordered Tibet before the continental collision that lifted it skyward.”
Given below is an extract from an account of the Tethys Ocean downloaded from the Internet. Go online, key in Tethys Ocean in Google search and you will find exhaustive information on this geological event. You can also consult an encyclopedia.
Today, India, Indonesia and the Indian Ocean cover the area once occupied by the Tethys Ocean. Turkey, Iraq, and Tibet sit on the land once known as Cimmeria. Most of the floor of the Tethys Ocean disappeared under Cimmeria and Laurasia. We only know that Tethys existed because geologists like Suess have found fossils of ocean creatures in rocks in the Himalayas. So, we know those rocks were underwater, before the Indian continental shelf began pushing upward as it smashed into Cimmeria. We can see similar geologic evidence in
Europe, where the movement of Africa raised the Alps.
Reprint 2026-27 silk roAd 67
A travelogue presenting a panoramic view of Mt Kailash.
Understanding the text
 Factual comprehension
 Author’s adventurous experiences while scaling the hilly terrain
Talking about the text
 Lifestyle of hill-folk
 Author’s description of exotic places
Thinking about language
 English spoken by guides
 Communicating with strangers
 Guessing the meanings of words from other languages from the context
Working with words
 Noticing picturesque phrases
 Use of uncommon adjectives
Noticing form
Predominant use of active voice as a contributor to the style of narration
Things to do
Getting information about geological formations from the Internet/encyclopedia
Reprint 2026-27
Father to Son Elizabeth Jennings
I do not understand this child
Though we have lived together now
In the same house for years. I know
Nothing of him, so try to build
Up a relationship from how
He was when small. Yet have I killed
The seed I spent or sown it where
The land is his and none of mine?
We speak like strangers, there’s no sign
Of understanding in the air.
This child is built to my design
Yet what he loves I cannot share.
Silence surrounds us. I would have
Him prodigal, returning to
His father’s house, the home he knew,
Rather than see him make and move
His world. I would forgive him too,
Shaping from sorrow a new love.
Father and son, we both must live
On the same globe and the same land,
He speaks: I cannot understand
Myself, why anger grows from grief.
We each put out an empty hand,
Longing for something to forgive.
Reprint 2026-27 fAtHer to son 69
Think it out
1. Does the poem talk of an exclusively personal experience or is it fairly universal?
2. How is the father’s helplessness brought out in the poem?
3. Identify the phrases and lines that indicate distance between father and
4. Does the poem have a consistent rhyme scheme?
The poem is autobiographical in nature and describes the relationship between a father and his son.
Understanding the poem
Questions are based on
 the universality of the experience described
 phrases in the poem
 rhyme scheme in the poem
Reprint 2026-27
