74 Hornbill
´üČ How many species? ÔÇö 51
´üČ What is the source of information? ÔÇö ESI chart
´üČ What is the purpose of the ESI chart? ÔÇö Create awareness among school eco-clubs under NGC
´üČ Which is the best known member? ÔÇö Peacock, IndiaÔÇÖs national bird
With the help of the answers note down the main points. Write the points without full forms of the verbs.
´üČ Pheasants ÔÇö shy birds with bright plumage found largely in Asia, especially India
´üČ Origin in the Himalayas and spread in China, Myanmar, South and
SE Asia.
´üČ Order: Galliformes ÔÇö game birds; Family: Phasinidae
´üČ No. of species: 51 (ESI chart)
´üČ Purpose of ESI chart ÔÇö Creating awareness among school eco-clubs under NGC.
´üČ Peacock ÔÇö IndiaÔÇÖs national bird, member of this family, represented in Indian art, culture and folklore.
´üČ Two or three related ideas can be combined into one point.
´üČ Use of colons
´üČ Use of the long dash
Now go over the facts and number them.
´üČ This is only to analyse the process of note-making. With practice you will be able to reach Step 4 immediately, going through Steps 2 and
3 mentally.
Reprint 2026-27 note-making 75
Finally we go over the facts and number them again.
Read carefully the characteristics of good notes which are given below.
1. (i) Notes should be short. They should identify the main point.
(ii) They list information in what is called ÔÇśnote formÔÇÖ.
(iii) They are written only in phrases; not sentences.
2. (i) Information is logically divided and subdivided by the use of figures/letters.
(ii) The divisions are made like this:
Main sections : 1, 2, 3, etc.
Sub-sections : (i), (ii), (iii), etc.
Sub-sub-sections : (a), (b), (c), etc.
3. Another common method is the ÔÇśdecimalÔÇÖ system.
Main sections : 1, 2, 3, etc.
Sub-sections : 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, etc.
Sub-sub-sections : 1.1.1, 1.1.2, 1.1.3, 1.2.1,
1.2.2, etc.
4. Abbreviations and symbols are freely used. Articles, prepositions and conjunctions are omitted.
5. Notes must make sense when they are read again otherwise they will be of no use.
Now read the following text.
The energy stored in coal and petroleum originally came to the earth from the sun. The bulk of the present-day supplies was laid down some 200 to 600 million years ago, when tropical conditions were widespread. Lush, swampy forests produced huge trees;
warm coastal seas swarmed with microscopic forms of life. When these organisms died, much of their tissue was recycled as it is today ÔÇö through scavenging and decay. But a significant amount of dead plant and animal material was covered with mud, which prevented complete decomposition.
With the passage of time, layer upon layer of the fine sediment was deposited over the once-living material; the sheer weight turned the sediments to rock. Sandwiched between the layers,
Reprint 2026-27
76 Hornbill both coal and petroleum were produced and preserved under pressure. Coal was formed mostly of giant fern-like plants that have only small counterparts today. Coal may still be forming here and there on earth, but conditions are not right for the production of significant quantities.
1. Underline the important words and phrases.
2. Write down points without fully expanded verbs, numbering them as you do.
3. Combine related points.
4. Group related points.
5. Change the verbs to nouns and begin points with them.
6. Number the points.
After you have finished check with the notes given below.
´üČ Storage of energy from sun in coal and petroleum
´üČ Deposit of bulk of supplies 200 ÔÇô 600 million years ago
´üČ Teeming life in tropical conditions
´üČ Death of life forms, leading to recycling through decay
´üČ Prevention of total decomposition by considerable dead plants, animals being covered with mud
´üČ Solidification of sediment leading to rock-formation over
´üČ Production of coal, petroleum by compression of organic matter between rocks
´üČ Unsuitability of present-day conditions for coal-formation
Reprint 2026-27
