82 hornbill
I n t h e a b s e n c e o f a h y g i e n i c environment and safe water supply, chronic water -borne diseases such as cholera and other communicable diseases continue to stalk the poor in the biggest cities.
It must be sobering to the affluent layers of the population that nearly
14 million Indian households (forming
26 per cent of the total) in the urban areas do not have a latrine within the house, as per the Census of India 2001;
some 14 per cent have only rudimentary
‘pit’ facilities. The number of households without a drainage connection stands at 11.8 million (representing 22.1 per cent of households). Migration to cities continues and infrastructure to treat sewage is grossly inadequate to meet the demand even where it exists.
It is unlikely that the quality of the urban environment can be dramatically improved therefore, if such fundamental questions remain unresolved.
Urban transport receives scant attention from policymakers. Policy distortions have led to rising automobile dependency, higher safety risks for road users, and land use plans that are based not on the needs of people, but primarily designed to facilitate use of private motorised vehicles.
It comes as no surprise therefore that pedestrians and bicycle riders, who form 30 to 70 per cent of peak hour traffic in most urban centres, also make up a large proportion of fatalities in road accidents. A paper prepared by the Transport Research and Injury
Prevention Programme (TRIPP) of the
Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi, says pedestrian fatalities in Mumbai and Delhi were nearly 78 per cent and
53 per cent of the total, according to recent data, compared to 13 per cent and 12 per cent in Germany and the
United States.
Such alarming death rates — and an equally high injury rate — should persuade policymakers to revisit their urban planning strategies and correct the distortions. But many cities such as Chennai have actually done the r everse — r educed footpaths and areas for pedestrian use to facilitate unrestricted use of motorised vehicles.
The practice in progressive world cities has been different. Curitiba in
Brazil, which has attracted global attention for innovative urban plans using low-cost technologies, has done everything that Indian policymakers would dread to do. Starting in the
1970s, this provincial centre with the highest per capita ownership of cars in Brazil (other than the capital) at the time, banned automobiles from many cr owded ar eas in favour of pedestrians, built an internationally acknowledged bus system that reduced household commuting expenditure to below the national average, and created new housing areas that were provided transport links in a planned manner. Some of the prestigious land development in the city, including a new
Opera House, came up in abandoned sites such as quarries.
The bus-way system cut riding time by a third, Scientific American noted in a review in the mid-1990s, by providing for advance ticketing, specially-designed boarding areas with wider doors for entry/exit and dedicated lanes for faster transit.
In another low-cost initiative, Curitiba managed floods with a dedication that
Mumbai, Bangalore, and Chennai can only marvel at. The city created large artificial lakes in suitable places that filled up in the monsoon, avoiding flooding of residential areas. In the summer, these lakes turned into parks to provide recreational spaces.
Reprint 2026-27
Sub-TiTling 83
State administrations and urban planning bodies in India follow policies that, ironically, allow filling of existing wetlands by real estate lobbies, leading to flooding. The residents then demand expensive new storm water drains.
Examples such as Curitiba show that inclusive development models for urban renewal are workable. If only the state and local governments can be persuaded to adopt a rights- based approach to affordable housing, sanitation, water supply, mobility and a clean environment, instead of a market- oriented model that lays excessive emphasis on recovery of costs incurred by profit-oriented private sector service provision. Support from a progressive middle class and trade unions is equally critical to bring about genuine urban renewal.
g. A nAnThAkriShnAn
The Hindu, 13 December 2005
Activity
1. Notice the italicised sentence placed at the top of the article which tells us at a glance what the article is about.
2. Divide the article into four sections based on the shifts in the sub- topics and give a suitable sub-heading for each section. One has been done for you in the article as an example.
3. Look for pictures in newspapers and magazines that depict the urban civic problems discussed in the text. Cut them out and pin them to the text at appropriate places.
Reprint 2026-27
4 . Essay-writing
M ost of us find it difficult to begin writing. We can make this easier by thinking about the topic either through brainstorming, that is with several people in a group giving their ideas as they strike them, or by putting them down on a sheet of paper as they occur to us.
For example, if the topic is ‘Hobbies’, we can draw a circle and write
‘hobbies’ in it:
Then we can put down our thoughts as they come to us in a random manner as shown below.
Having done that we select the points and expand each into a sentence.
1. Hobbies are free-time activities. Examples are stamp-collecting, painting etc.
Reprint 2026-27
Essay- writing 85
2. They are matters of personal choice, not forced.
3. They are interesting and give pleasure.
4. They refresh the mind by providing an opportunity to do different kinds of activities.
5. They provide relief from monotony.
6. They help us channelise our energy.
7. They can also be useful activities and can provide pleasure to others. For example, reading out to visually impaired people, visiting art exhibitions, music concerts etc.
8. Hobbies are educative and they widen our general knowledge.
9. They help us develop our overall personality.
10. They serve as a medium for the expression of our creativity.
11. We meet interesting people through our common interests and develop friendships.
We usually begin a topic with a definition or short description. We could begin thus:
Hobbies are activities that we engage in, in our free time. We may be interested in needlework, drawing and painting or music.
Other common hobbies are stamp-collecting, clay-modelling, solving crossword puzzles.
Although hobbies also entail work they are taken upon through one’s own personal choice. They are not forced upon us. They are activities that we are really interested in and hence give us a great deal of pleasure.
Hobbies make life interesting. They refresh our minds after a hard day’s work. We need to do something different in order to do our routine work effectively. Hobbies provide this variety.
Hobbies relieve us from the monotony of daily life. They fill us with enthusiasm for work and keep our energy levels high.
We will go to any extent to get the things that we require, to get the utmost joy from our hobbies.
Hobbies are also useful activities. Quite a few hobbies, like stamp-collecting, widen our general knowledge about various countries of the world. When we share common interests we even get into correspondence with people of other countries.
Reprint 2026-27
86 Hornbill
This is how we write an essay.
A composition on a particular subject consisting of more than one paragraph is an essay. The characteristics of a good essay are:
Unity : The essay should deal with the main subject, and all parts of it should be clearly linked with that subject.
Coherence : There should be a logical sequence of thought. This requires a logical relationship between ideas, sentences and paragraphs.
Relevance : Unimportant information should not be included.
Proportion: Giving more space to the important ideas.
Read the following essay and the passage analysis that follows it carefully.
The Importance of Games
1. “The Battle of Waterloo was won on the playing fields of Eton.” These words have been attributed to the Duke of Wellington. Certainly one does not play games in order to win battles; neither does the curriculum include them for that reason. But the importance of games in life should not be underestimated, for without them it is harder for a person to be sound in body and mind.
2. For one thing, if a person is to fulfil all the duties that society expects of him, it is important for him to keep healthy. He may be very intelligent, but that has little meaning if he cannot make use of his intelligence, because he is always suffering from bad health.
In some ways, the human body is like a machine. If it is not made use of, it starts to work badly. People who are not fit grow weak and become more susceptible to disease. Any form of game is useful, provided it gives the body an opportunity to take regular physical exercise.
3. Secondly, playing — and therefore experiencing winning and losing — encourages the spirit of sportsmanship, thus enabling one to deal with life’s problems in a wise and natural manner. Games teach the truth embodied in the Olympic motto: ‘The important thing in playing is not the winning or the losing, but the participation’ — and, I may add, doing the best one can.
4. We have to remember some other things about playing games, however. First, it is the physical exercise that is important for
Reprint 2026-27
Essay- writing 87 health, not the games themselves, and there are other ways of getting this. Is not India the home of yoga? It is also possible to be too interested in games. When we think of the Greek ideal expressed in the Latin phrase, ‘mens sana in corpore sano’ (a healthy mind in a healthy body), we should not forget that it is the mind which is mentioned first. And if we let games become the most important thing in our lives, we may be in danger of changing the Olympic motto to ‘the important thing is winning’.
5. Nevertheless, in spite of these dangers, playing games can be a valuable activity, and if we take part in them wisely, we can gain great benefits.
Passage Analysis
 The writer uses five paragraphs
 Each paragraph deals sequentially with a topic.
– Paragraph 1 introduces the subject, and makes a general statement about the importance of games.
– Paragraph 2 explains the benefits of playing games.
– Paragraph 3 deals with the moral benefits.
– Paragraph 4 deals with the disadvantages and dangers.
– Paragraph 5 sums up the writer’s opinion, taking into account all he has said in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4, i.e. it forms the conclusion.
The structure (or plan) of the essay is summed up in the following flow diagram.
Reprint 2026-27
88 Hornbill
Activity
Here are a few topics for essay writing. Follow the steps listed above to write on these topics.
1. Himalayan quake 2005.
2. Those who can bear all can dare all.
3. Fascinating facts about water.
4. Public health in transition.
5. Human population grows up.
6. Success begins in the mind.
7. Think before you shop.
The trend of decline in the Child Sex Ratio (CSR) defined as the number of girls per 1000 boys between 0–6 years of age, has remained unabated till today. To ensure survival, protection and empowerment of the girl child, the government has announced Beti
Bachao, Beti Padhao scheme. This is being implemented through a national campaign. The objectives of this scheme are:
• Prevention of gender-biased sex selection elimination.
• Ensuring survival and protection of the girl child.
• Ensuring education and participation of the girl child.
Organise as essay writing activity in your class, the themes should be based on the objectives stated above. Mention how you can contribute to this programme, in the essay.
Reprint 2026-27
5 . Letter-writing
L etter - writing is an important channel of communication between people who are geographically distant from one another. In earlier times when the telephone and e-mail were not available, the only means of communication between people was through letters.
Letter-writing is a skill that has to be developed. In general there are two types of letters: formal, that are written to convey official business and information and informal, which are personal letters to communicate with friends and family. Formal letters are sent out when we need to write to various public bodies or agencies for our requirements in civic life. For example, we might have to ask for a certificate or to inform a change in our address. A letter is usually one in a series of exchanges between two people or parties.
Formal Letters
Let us now examine some of the steps in writing formal letters.
1. (i) Introducing oneself if it is the first time you are writing (ii) Referring to an earlier letter if you are responding to it.
2. Stating the purpose of the letter
3. (i) Stating action/information required from the addressee (ii) Explaining action taken/supplying information
4. (i) Urging action to be taken (ii) Offering assistance in future
This is the basic structure of a letter. It will have to be modified according to the purpose for which it is written and the person to whom it is addressed.
When you write a letter you should keep in mind the following points.
1. Purpose
2. Person to whom it is addressed
3. Tone you should adopt
Reprint 2026-27
90 H ornbiLL
4. Completeness of the message
5. Action required
6. Conciseness of expression
We have so far considered the content of letters. A letter also has a typical format.
1. Name and address of sender
Companies have printed letterheads with the name of the company printed on them. A letterhead may also carry the name and designation of persons in responsible positions.
2. Name and address of addressee
4. Mode of address or salutation
Salutation is the mode of addressing a person. We may have the following forms.
(i) Dear Sir/Madam (when we are writing to a total stranger whom we do not know at all).
(ii) Dear Mr/Ms/Dr/Professor + Surname as in: Dear Dr Sinha, (when it is a formal relationship with the addressee and the writer does not know him or her personally).
(iii) Dear Sujata (when the writer knows the addressee personally and the two share a semi-formal relationship).
5. Reference to previous correspondence, if any.
Most official letters carry a subject line just above the salutation.
This is for quick reference to the subject.
6. Content of letter
The content of the letter begins on the next line and is arranged in two or three paragraphs.
7. Complimentary close and signature
Letters usually end politely with the following phrases: Thank you, With regards, With best wishes, Hope to see you soon, Hope to receive an early reply etc. The complimentary close is followed by ‘Yours sincerely/ Yours truly’, and the writer’s signature in the next line.
Reprint 2026-27
