L etter - writing 91
Given below is an example of the format of a formal letter.
Ritu Patel
Manager, Customer Services
Vijayanagar Gas Company
121, Ameerpet
Hyderabad 500 016
12 November 2005
Mr Shagun Thomas
801, Vijay Apartments
Begumpet
Hyderabad 500 016
Sub: Your application No. F323 for a new gas connection
Dear Mr Thomas,
——————————————————————————————
With regards,
Yours sincerely,
Ritu Patel
Nowadays all the parts of a letter are aligned on the left. This style is called the Full-Block style.
 The date and signature are very important in letters.
 We do not use commas after every line in the address.
 Do not begin your letters with hackneyed expressions like, ‘With reference to your letter dated 10 January’. Instead, use personalised variations like, ‘I was glad to receive your letter of 10 January…’ or
Reprint 2026-27
92 H ornbiLL
‘We were happy to note from your letter that the goods have reached you safely…’
 Never end your letters with hanging participles like ‘Thanking you’ or ‘Awaiting your reply’. Instead write, ‘Thank you’ or ‘We/I await/ look forward to your reply’.
Informal Letters
Informal letters include personal letters. If it is a personal letter the format is flexible. We might just write the name of our city on top, followed by the date.
Hyderabad
12 November 2005
Dear Sujata,
——————————————————————————————
Yours affectionately/With love/
All the best/Take care etc.
(Signature)
The flexible format of the informal letter may also be used to seek information from concerned authorities. Given below is an example.
Reprint 2026-27
L etter - writing 93
179 NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New Delhi 110 016
9 September 2005
The Manager
Himachal Tourism
Mall Road
Dear Sir,
We are planning to spend our vacation in Dharamsala, Himachal
Pradesh during Dussehra and would like some information regarding availability of lodging in the area.
We would like to have information about inexpensive hotels in and around Dharamsala. Could you please send me a city map and brochures about the activities and sights in the city?
Thank you.
Yours faithfully, (Suryadhan Kumar)
Given below is the format of the informal letter.
 Your address (but not your name) usually goes in the top right-hand corner, but may go on the left too.
 The name and/or job title (if you know them) and the address of the person you are writing to goes on the left.
 To address someone whose name you do not know you can write:
Dear Sir, Dear Madam, Dear Sirs, Dear Sir/Madam.
 To address someone by name, use their title and surname e.g. Dear
Dr Balakrishnan.
Reprint 2026-27
94 H ornbiLL
 To end a letter, use ‘Yours sincerely’, if you have addressed the person by name; ‘Yours faithfully’, if you have begun the letter with
‘Dear Sir’ or ‘Madam’, etc.
Job Application
At some point of time each one of us will have to apply for a job. Job applications are usually written in response to advertisements.
Let us take this sample advertisement from a daily newspaper, The
Hindu dated 15 November 2005.
Come…join the ADVENTURE
C u s t o m e r S u p p o r t E x e c u t i v e s
Graduate/Diploma holders with/ without experience possessing good
Customer Service skills. Excellent spoken and written communication skills in English is a must.
Send in your applications with your resume and passport size photograph to:
WoNDERLAND CoMMUNICATIoNS,
SoUTH STREET, SALEM,
TAMIL NADU
Let us assume that you have a degree or a diploma and are applying for the job. We need to prepare a resume, which actually means a summary of particulars relating to your background, academic qualifications and experience, if any. other terms used for ‘resume’ are ‘curriculum vitae’ and ‘biodata’.
The general format of a resume or curriculum vitae is shown below.
Reprint 2026-27
L etter - writing 95
CurriCulum Vitae
Address :
Telephone Number :
E-mail ID :
Date of birth :
Academic Qualifications :
Examination Board/
University
Subjects Year Division
Diploma in…
Degree in…
Experience : (Begin from present employment)
Skills :
Languages known :
Hobbies and Interests :
Achievements :
References : (names of people in positions like your school Prinicipal who can certify your character and conduct)
Now we need to send a covering letter along with the curriculum vitae.
The following letter is an example.
Reprint 2026-27
96 H ornbiLL
Your name and address
The Manager
Human Resource Division
Wonderland Communications
South Street, Salem
Tamil Nadu
Dear Sir,
I would like to apply for the post of Customer Support Executive that you have advertised in The Hindu of 15 November 2005.
I have just completed my Diploma in Communication from the State Polytechnic. I was happy to note that you do not insist on experience.
If selected, this would be my first job. I am a sincere, honest and hardworking person. I am friendly and outgoing and have good communication skills.
I am enclosing my resume and look forward to meeting you in person.
Regards,
Yours truly, (Signature)
Activities
1. You have not received your Roll Number card for the Class XII examination. Write a letter to the Registrar, Examination Branch,
CBSE asking for it.
2. Write a letter to the President, Residents’ Welfare Association of your locality suggesting some measures that could be taken for solving the problem of water scarcity and conserving water.
Reprint 2026-27
L etter - writing 97
3. Write a letter to the editor of a newspaper expressing your views on the deteriorating law and order situation in your city.
4. Write a letter to your friend narrating your experiences in a rescue operation.
5. Write a letter to the Editor of a magazine describing a dance performance you have seen or an art gallery you have visited.
Reprint 2026-27
6 . Creative Writing
T he teacher was explaining the lines in the beginning of Shakespeare’s play Macbeth. It was a description of the battle and the lines were:
Like Valour’s minion, carved out his passage,
Till he faced the slave;
With ne’er shook hands, nor baded farewell to him.
Till he unseam’d him from the nave to the chaps,…
The teacher asked the students what the word ‘unseamed’ meant. It was difficult. The teacher prodded them on. “What does ‘seam’ mean?
Haven’t you ever come across the word?” One of the students blurted out “Cricket ball”.
This is an example of how each of us reacts to words according to what our own experience has been.
When we write about factual information, all of us write almost similarly. But when we write for pleasure each of us may write about the same event in different ways.
One very important element in creative writing is imagination. This is reflected in
 our view or perspective
 choice of words
 the comparisons we make
 the images we use
 the tone we adopt
 novelty of ideas.
Let us study the paragraph below.
A town is like an animal. A town has a nervous system and a head and shoulders and feet. A town is a thing separate from all other towns, so that there are no towns alike. And a town has a whole emotion. How news travels through a town is a mystery not easily to be solved. News seems to move faster than small boys can scramble
Reprint 2026-27
CreaTive WriTing 99 and dart to tell it, faster than women can call it over the fences. (from an adapted version of Steinbeck’s The Pearl)
The topic: A Town
Analogy or comparison: to an animal
Word choice: “has a whole emotion.”
Comparisons: “faster than small boys can scramble and dart, faster than women….”
We find the first element of imagination operating in the way the writer visualises the town. Then he extends the primary analogy. The tone he adopts is light humour, a little sarcastic.
When we begin to write a story or poem we let our imagination free.
We try to say things in a new way. This novelty is what makes our writing pleasurable to the reader.
Sometimes sentence structures are also different from factual writing.
Consider the following:
They waited in their chairs until the pearls came in, and then they cackled and fought and shouted and threatened until they reached the lowest price the fisherman would stand. (from
The Pearl).
In a normal construction we will not use so many ‘ands’. But the action of the story is best reflected through this kind of chaining of actions through ‘ands’. It is appropriate to the movement of the action described.
Let us look at another example:
She dragged me after her into Miss Rachel’s sitting-room, which opened to her bedroom. At her bedroom door stood Miss Rachel, her face almost white as the white dressing-gown she wore.
The author has used a simile: “white as the white dressing-gown she
In fact, the whiteness of a human face is because of a strong emotion
— fear or shock.
But here comparing the whiteness to the dressing-gown she wore serves to exaggerate and intensify the emotion.
Exaggeration is one of the ways in which fact is distinguished from fiction.
Now look at these lines from a well-known poem, ‘An Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard’ by Thomas Gray.
Reprint 2026-27
100 hornbill
Full many a gem of purest ray serene
The dark unfathom’d caves of ocean bear
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen
And waste its fragrance in the desert air.
The stanza carries a simple statement: many people with outstanding qualities live and die unnoticed by the world.
To state this, the poet has used two strong images, ‘a gem’ and ‘a flower’.
He has used two contrasting places: the ocean, that is full of water and the desert with no water at all.
Also notice the rhyming words: ‘serene’ and ‘unseen’, ‘bear’ and ‘air’.
The first and third lines also begin with the same words —“full many a”. The lines are of equal length.
All this together contribute to the literary quality of these lines.
Activity I
Put down the images that come to your mind immediately when you see the words in the box.
cat cupboard wall pond bird
Activity II
Try to write four lines of poetry or four sentences of prose with one of these as the starting point.
Activity III
Write a short story beginning with this sentence:
When the last of the guests left, I went back into the hall.…
Activity IV
Look for a story, a poem and a newspaper article on environment conservation and see how the style of each is different from the other.
Reprint 2026-27
