FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY 20 body waves. The body waves interact with the surface rocks and generate new set of waves called surface waves. These waves move along the surface. The velocity of waves changes as they travel through materials with different densities. The denser the material, the higher is the velocity. Their direction also changes as they reflect or refract when coming across materials with different densities.
pressure on the material in the direction of the propagation. As a result, it creates density differences in the material leading to stretching and squeezing of the material. Other three waves vibrate perpendicular to the direction of propagation. The direction of vibrations of
S-waves is perpendicular to the wave direction in the vertical plane. Hence, they create troughs and crests in the material through which they pass. Surface waves are considered to be the most damaging waves.
Emergence of Shadow Zone
Earthquake waves get recorded in seismo- graphs located at far off locations. However, there exist some specific areas where the waves are not reported. Such a zone is called the
‘shadow zone’. The study of different events reveals that for each earthquake, there exists an altogether different shadow zone. Figure 3.2 (a) and (b) show the shadow zones of P and
S-waves. It was observed that seismographs located at any distance within 105° from the epicentre, recorded the arrival of both P and
S-waves. However, the seismographs located beyond 145° from epicentre, record the arrival of P-waves, but not that of S-waves. Thus, a zone between 105° and 145° from epicentre was identified as the shadow zone for both the types of waves. The entire zone beyond 105° does not receive S-waves. The shadow zone of S-wave is much larger than that of the P-waves. The shadow zone of P-waves appears as a band around the earth between 105° and 145° away from the epicentre. The shadow zone of S-waves is not only larger in extent but it is also a little over 40 per cent of the earth surface. You can draw the shadow zone for any earthquake provided you know the location of the epicentre.
Types of Earthquakes (i) The most common ones are the tectonic earthquakes. These are generated due to sliding of rocks along a fault plane.
(ii) A special class of tectonic earthquake is sometimes recognised as volcanic earthquake. However, these are confined to areas of active volcanoes.
Figur Figur Figur Figur Figure 3.1 : Earthquake W e 3.1 : Earthquake W e 3.1 : Earthquake W e 3.1 : Earthquake W e 3.1 : Earthquake Waves aves aves aves aves
There are two types of body waves. They are called P and S-waves. P-waves move faster and are the first to arrive at the surface. These are also called ‘primary waves’. The P-waves are similar to sound waves. They travel through gaseous, liquid and solid materials.
S-waves arrive at the surface with some time lag. These are called secondary waves. An important fact about S-waves is that they can travel only through solid materials. This characteristic of the S-waves is quite important. It has helped scientists to understand the structure of the interior of the earth. Reflection causes waves to rebound whereas refraction makes waves move in different directions. The variations in the direction of waves are inferred with the help of their record on seismograph. The surface waves are the last to report on seismograph.
These waves are more destructive. They cause displacement of rocks, and hence, the collapse of structures occurs.
Propagation of Earthquake Waves
Different types of earthquake waves travel in different manners. As they move or propagate, they cause vibration in the body of the rocks through which they pass. P-waves vibrate parallel to the direction of the wave. This exerts
Reprint 2026-27
INTERIOR OF THE EARTH 21 (v) The earthquakes that occur in the areas of large reservoirs are referred to as reservoir induced earthquakes.
Measuring Earthquakes
The earthquake events are scaled either according to the magnitude or intensity of the shock. The magnitude scale is known as the Richter scale. The magnitude relates to the energy released during the quake. The magnitude is expressed in numbers, 0-10.
The intensity scale is named after Mercalli, an Italian seismologist. The intensity scale takes into account the visible damage caused by the event. The range of intensity scale is from 1-12.
E E E E EFFECTS FFECTS FFECTS FFECTS FFECTS OF OF OF OF OF E E E E EARTHQUAKE ARTHQUAKE ARTHQUAKE ARTHQUAKE ARTHQUAKE
Earthquake is a natural hazard. The following are the immediate hazardous effects of earthquake:
(i) Ground Shaking (ii) Differential ground settlement (iii) Land and mud slides (iv) Soil liquefaction (v) Ground lurching (vi) Avalanches (vii) Ground displacement (viii) Floods from dam and levee failures (ix) Fires (x) Structural collapse (xi) Falling objects (xii) Tsunami
The first six listed above have some bearings upon landforms, while others may be considered the effects causing immediate concern to the life and properties of people in the region. The effect of tsunami would occur only if the epicentre of the tremor is below oceanic waters and the magnitude is sufficiently high. Tsunamis are waves generated by the tremors and not an earthquake in itself. Though the actual quake activity lasts for a few seconds, its effects are devastating provided the magnitude of the quake is more than 5 on the Richter scale.
Figure 3.2 (a) and (b) : Earthquake Shadow Zones Figure 3.2 (a) and (b) : Earthquake Shadow Zones Figure 3.2 (a) and (b) : Earthquake Shadow Zones Figure 3.2 (a) and (b) : Earthquake Shadow Zones Figure 3.2 (a) and (b) : Earthquake Shadow Zones (iii) In the areas of intense mining activity, sometimes the roofs of underground mines collapse causing minor tremors.
These are called collapse earthquakes.
(iv) Ground shaking may also occur due to the explosion of chemical or nuclear devices. Such tremors are called explosion earthquakes.
Reprint 2026-27
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY 22
Frequency of Earthquake Occurrences
The earthquake is a natural hazard. If a tremor of high magnitude takes place, it can cause heavy damage to the life and property of people. However, not all the parts of the globe necessarily experience major shocks. We shall be discussing the distribution of earthquakes and volcanoes with some details in the next once in 1-2 years whereas those of ‘tiny’ types occur almost every minute.
STRUCTURE OF THE EARTH
The Crust
It is the outermost solid part of the earth. It is brittle in nature. The thickness of the crust varies under the oceanic and continental areas.
Oceanic crust is thinner as compared to the continental crust. The mean thickness of oceanic crust is 5 km whereas that of the continental is around 30 km. The continental crust is thicker in the areas of major mountain systems. It is as much as 70 km thick in the
Himalayan region.
The Mantle
The portion of the interior beyond the crust is called the mantle. The mantle extends from
Moho’s discontinuity to a depth of 2,900 km.
The upper portion of the mantle is called asthenosphere. The word astheno means weak.
It is considered to be extending upto 400 km. It is the main source of magma that finds chapter. Note that the quakes of high magnitude, i.e. 8+ are quite rare; they occur
A view of the damaged Aman Setu at the LOC in Uri, due to an earthquake
Reprint 2026-27
INTERIOR OF THE EARTH 23 its way to the surface during volcanic eruptions. The crust and the uppermost part of the mantle are called lithosphere. Its thickness ranges from 10-200 km. The lower mantle extends beyond the asthenosphere. It is in solid state.
The Core
As indicated earlier, the earthquake wave velocities helped in understanding the existence of the core of the earth. The core- mantle boundary is located at the depth of
2,900 km. The outer core is in liquid state while the inner core is in solid state. The core is made up of very heavy material mostly constituted by nickel and iron. It is sometimes referred to as the nife layer.
VOLCANOES AND VOLCANIC LANDFORMS
You may have seen photographs or pictures of volcanoes on a number of occasions. A volcano is a place where gases, ashes and/or molten rock material – lava – escape to the ground. A volcano is called an active volcano if the materials mentioned are being released or have been released out in the recent past. The layer below the solid crust is mantle. It has higher density than that of the crust. The mantle contains a weaker zone called asthenosphere. It is from this that the molten rock materials find their way to the surface.
The material in the upper mantle portion is called magma. Once it starts moving towards the crust or it reaches the surface, it is referred to as lava. The material that reaches the ground includes lava flows, pyroclastic debris, volcanic bombs, ash and dust and gases such as nitrogen compounds, sulphur compounds and minor amounts of chlorene, hydrogen and argon.
Volcanoes
Volcanoes are classified on the basis of nature of eruption and the form developed at the surface. Major types of volcanoes are as follows:
Shield Volcanoes
Barring the basalt flows, the shield volcanoes are the largest of all the volcanoes on the earth.
The Hawaiian volcanoes are the most famous
Figure 3.3 : The interior of the earth
Shield Volcano
Cinder Cone
Reprint 2026-27
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY 24 examples. These volcanoes are mostly made up of basalt, a type of lava that is very fluid when erupted. For this reason, these volcanoes are not steep. They become explosive if somehow water gets into the vent; otherwise, they are characterised by low-explosivity. The upcoming lava moves in the form of a fountain and throws out the cone at the top of the vent and develops into cinder cone.
Composite Volcanoes
These volcanoes are characterised by eruptions of cooler and more viscous lavas than basalt. These volcanoes often result in explosive eruptions. Along with lava, large quantities of pyroclastic material and ashes find their way to the ground. This material accumulates in the vicinity of the vent openings leading to formation of layers, and this makes the mounts appear as composite volcanoes.
more than 50 m. Individual flows may extend for hundreds of km. The Deccan Traps from
India, presently covering most of the
Maharashtra plateau, are a much larger flood basalt province. It is believed that initially the trap formations covered a much larger area than the present.
Mid-Ocean Ridge Volcanoes
These volcanoes occur in the oceanic areas.
There is a system of mid-ocean ridges more than 70,000 km long that stretches through all the ocean basins. The central portion of this ridge experiences frequent eruptions. We shall be discussing this in detail in the next chapter.
VOLCANIC LANDFORMS
Intrusive Forms
The lava that is released during volcanic eruptions on cooling develops into igneous rocks. The cooling may take place either on reaching the surface or also while the lava is still in the crustal portion. Depending on the location of the cooling of the lava, igneous rocks are classified as volcanic rocks (cooling at the surface) and plutonic rocks (cooling in the crust). The lava that cools within the crustal portions assumes different forms. These forms are called intrusive forms. Some of the forms are shown in Figure 3.4. Composite Volcano
These are the most explosive of the earth’s volcanoes. They are usually so explosive that when they erupt they tend to collapse on themselves rather than building any tall structure. The collapsed depressions are called calderas. Their explosiveness indicates that the magma chamber supplying the lava is not only huge but is also in close vicinity.
Flood Basalt Provinces
These volcanoes outpour highly fluid lava that flows for long distances. Some parts of the world are covered by thousands of sq. km of thick basalt lava flows. There can be a series of flows with some flows attaining thickness of Figure 3.4 : Volcanic Landforms
Reprint 2026-27
INTERIOR OF THE EARTH 25
Batholiths
A large body of magmatic material that cools in the deeper depth of the crust develops in the form of large domes. They appear on the surface only after the denudational processes remove the overlying materials. They cover large areas, and at times, assume depth that may be several km. These are granitic bodies. Batholiths are the cooled portion of magma chambers.
Lacoliths
These are large dome-shaped intrusive bodies with a level base and connected by a pipe-like conduit from below. It resembles the surface volcanic domes of composite volcano, only these are located at deeper depths. It can be regarded as the localised source of lava that finds its way to the surface. The Karnataka plateau is spotted with domal hills of granite rocks. Most of these, now exfoliated, are examples of lacoliths or batholiths.
Lapolith, Phacolith and Sills
As and when the lava moves upwards, a portion of the same may tend to move in a horizontal direction wherever it finds a weak plane. It may get rested in different forms. In case it develops into a saucer shape, concave to the sky body, it is called lapolith. A wavy mass of intrusive rocks, at times, is found at the base of synclines or at the top of anticline in folded igneous country. Such wavy materials have a definite conduit to source beneath in the form of magma chambers (subsequently developed as batholiths). These are called the phacoliths.
The near horizontal bodies of the intrusive igneous rocks are called sill or sheet, depending on the thickness of the material. The thinner ones are called sheets while the thick horizontal deposits are called sills.
When the lava makes its way through cracks and the fissures developed in the land, it solidifies almost perpendicular to the ground.
It gets cooled in the same position to develop a wall-like structure. Such structures are called dykes. These are the most commonly found intrusive forms in the western Maharashtra area.
These are considered the feeders for the eruptions that led to the development of the Deccan traps.
EXERCISES
1. Multiple choice questions.
(i) Which one of the following earthquake waves is more destructive?
(a) P-waves (c) Surface waves (b) S-waves (d) None of the above (ii) Which one of the following is a direct source of information about the interior of the earth?
(a) Earthquake waves (c) Gravitational force (b) Volcanoes (d) Earth magnetism (iii) Which type of volcanic eruptions have caused Deccan Trap formations?
(a) Shield (c) Composite (b) Flood (d) Caldera (iv) Which one of the following describes the lithosphere:
(a) upper and lower mantle (c) crust and core (b) crust and upper mantle (d) mantle and core
Reprint 2026-27
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY 26
2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) What are body waves?
(ii) Name the direct sources of information about the interior of the earth.
(iii) Why do earthquake waves develop shadow zone?
(iv) Briefly explain the indirect sources of information of the interior of the earth other than those of seismic activity.
3. Answer the following questions in about 150 words.
(i) What are the effects of propagation of earthquake waves on the rock mass through which they travel?
(ii) What do you understand by intrusive forms? Briefly describe various intrusive forms.
Reprint 2026-27
