In the previous chapter, you have studied the interior of the earth. You are already familiar with the world map. You know that continents cover 29 per cent of the surface of the earth and the remainder is under oceanic waters.
The positions of the continents and the ocean bodies, as we see them in the map, have not been the same in the past. Moreover, it is now a well-accepted fact that oceans and continents will not continue to enjoy their present positions in times to come. If this is so, the question arises what were their positions in the past? Why and how do they change their positions? Even if it is true that the continents and oceans have changed and are changing their positions, you may wonder as to how scientists know this. How have they determined their earlier positions? You will find the answers to some of these and related questions in this chapter.
CONTINENTAL DRIFT
Observe the shape of the coastline of the Atlantic
Ocean. You will be surprised by the symmetry of the coastlines on either side of the ocean. No wonder, many scientists thought of this similarity and considered the possibility of the two Americas, Europe and Africa, to be once joined together. From the known records of the history of science, it was Abraham Ortelius, a
Dutch map maker, who first proposed such a possibility as early as 1596. Antonio Pellegrini drew a map showing the three continents together.
However, it was Alfred Wegener—a German meteorologist who put forth a comprehensive argument in the form of “the continental drift
DISTRIBUTION OF OCEANS
AND CONTINENTS
C H A P T E R theory” in 1912. This was regarding the distribution of the oceans and the continents.
According to Wegener, all the continents formed a single continental mass and mega ocean surrounded the same. The super continent was named PANGAEA, which meant all earth. The mega-ocean was called
PANTHALASSA, meaning all water. He argued that, around 200 million years ago, the super continent, Pangaea, began to split. Pangaea first broke into two large continental masses as
Laurasia and Gondwanaland forming the northern and southern components respectively. Subsequently, Laurasia and
Gondwanaland continued to break into various smaller continents that exist today. A variety of evidence was offered in support of the continental drift. Some of these are given below.
Evidence in Support of the Continental Drift
The Matching of Continents (Jig-Saw-Fit)
The shorelines of Africa and South America facing each other have a remarkable and unmistakable match. It may be noted that a map produced using a computer programme to find the best fit of the Atlantic margin was presented by Bullard in 1964. It proved to be quite perfect. The match was tried at 1,000- fathom line instead of the present shoreline.
Rocks of Same Age Across the Oceans
The radiometric dating methods developed in the recent period have facilitated correlating the rock formation from different continents across
Reprint 2026-27
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY 28 the vast ocean. The belt of ancient rocks of
2,000 million years from Brazil coast matches with those from western Africa. The earliest marine deposits along the coastline of South
America and Africa are of the Jurassic age.
This suggests that the ocean did not exist prior to that time.
It is the sedimentary rock formed out of deposits of glaciers. The Gondawana system of sediments from India is known to have its counterparts in six different landmasses of the
Southern Hemisphere. At the base, the system has thick tillite indicating extensive and prolonged glaciation. Counterparts of this succession are found in Africa, Falkland Island,
Madagascar, Antarctica and Australia. Overall resemblance of the Gondawana-type sediments clearly demonstrates that these landmasses had remarkably similar histories. The glacial tillite provides unambiguous evidence of palaeoclimates and also of drifting of continents.
Placer Deposits
The occurrence of rich placer deposits of gold in the Ghana coast and the absolute absence of source rock in the region is an amazing fact.
The gold bearing veins are in Brazil and it is obvious that the gold deposits of the Ghana are derived from the Brazil plateau when the two continents lay side by side.
Distribution of Fossils
When identical species of plants and animals adapted to living on land or in fresh water are found on either side of the marine barriers, a problem arises regarding accounting for such distribution. The observations that Lemurs occur in India, Madagascar and Africa led some to consider a contiguous landmass ‘Lemuria’ linking these three landmasses. Mesosaurus was a small reptile adapted to shallow brackish water. The skeletons of these are found only in two localities: the Southern Cape province of South Africa and Iraver formations of Brazil.
The two localities are presently 4,800 km apart with an ocean in between them.
Force for Drifting
Wegener suggested that the movement responsible for the drifting of the continents was caused by pole-fleeing force and tidal force.
The polar-fleeing force relates to the rotation of the earth. You are aware of the fact that the earth is not a perfect sphere; it has a bulge at the equator. This bulge is due to the rotation of the earth. The second force that was suggested by Wegener — the tidal force — is due to the attraction of the moon and the sun that develops tides in oceanic waters. Wegener believed that these forces would become effective when applied over many million years.
However, most of scholars considered these forces to be totally inadequate.
Post-drift Studies
It is interesting to note that for continental drift, most of the evidence was collected from the continental areas in the form of distribution of flora and fauna or deposits, like tillite. A number of discoveries during the post–World
War II period added new information to geological literature. Particularly, the information collected from the ocean floor mapping provided new dimensions for the study of distribution of oceans and continents.
Convectional Current Theory
Arthur Holmes in 1930s discussed the possibility of convection currents operating in the mantle portion. These currents are generated due to radioactive elements causing thermal differences in the mantle portion.
Holmes argued that there exists a system of such currents in the entire mantle portion. This was an attempt to provide an explanation to the issue of force, on the basis of which contemporary scientists discarded the continental drift theory.
Mapping of the Ocean Floor
Detailed research of the ocean configuration revealed that the ocean floor is not just a vast plain but it is full of relief. Expeditions to map the oceanic floor in the post–World War II period provided a detailed picture of the ocean relief and indicated the existence of submerged
Reprint 2026-27
DISTRIBUTION OF OCEANS AND CONTINENTS 29 mountain ranges as well as deep trenches, mostly located closer to the continent margins.
The mid-oceanic ridges were found to be most active in terms of volcanic eruptions. The dating of the rocks from the oceanic crust revealed the fact that they are much younger than the continental areas. Rocks on either side of the crest of oceanic ridges and having equi-distant locations from the crest were found to have remarkable similarities both in terms of their constituents and their age.
Ocean Floor Configuration Ocean Floor Configuration Ocean Floor Configuration Ocean Floor Configuration Ocean Floor Configuration
In this section we shall note a few things related to the ocean floor configuration that help us in the understanding of the distribution of continents and oceans. You will be studying the details of ocean floor relief in Chapter
12. The ocean floor may be segmented into three major divisions based on the depth as well as the forms of relief. These divisions are continental margins, deep-sea basins and mid-ocean ridges.
Abyssal Plains
These are extensive plains that lie between the continental margins and mid-oceanic ridges.
The abyssal plains are the areas where the continental sediments that move beyond the margins get deposited.
Mid-Oceanic Ridges
This forms an interconnected chain of mountain system within the ocean. It is the longest mountain-chain on the surface of the earth though submerged under the oceanic waters. It is characterised by a central rift system at the crest, a fractionated plateau and flank zone all along its length. The rift system at the crest is the zone of intense volcanic activity. In the previous chapter, you have been introduced to this type of volcanoes as mid- oceanic volcanoes.
Distribution of Earthquakes and V Distribution of Earthquakes and V Distribution of Earthquakes and V Distribution of Earthquakes and V Distribution of Earthquakes and Volcanoes olcanoes olcanoes olcanoes olcanoes
Study the maps showing the distribution of seismic activity and volcanoes given in Figure
4.2. You will notice a line of dots in the central parts of the Atlantic Ocean almost parallel to the coastlines. It further extends into the Indian
Ocean. It bifurcates a little south of the Indian subcontinent with one branch moving into
East Africa and the other meeting a similar line from Myanmar to New Guiana. You will notice that this line of dots coincides with the mid- oceanic ridges. The shaded belt showing another area of concentration coincides with the Alpine-Himalayan system and the rim of the Pacific Ocean. In general, the foci of the earthquake in the areas of mid-oceanic ridges are at shallow depths whereas along the
Alpine-Himalayan belt as well as the rim of the
Pacific, the earthquakes are deep-seated ones.
The map of volcanoes also shows a similar pattern. The rim of the Pacific is also called rim of fire due to the existence of active volcanoes in this area.
C C C C CONCEPT ONCEPT ONCEPT ONCEPT ONCEPT OF OF OF OF OF S S S S SEA EA EA EA EA F F F F FLOOR LOOR LOOR LOOR LOOR S S S S SPREADING PREADING PREADING PREADING PREADING
As mentioned above, the post-drift studies provided considerable information that was not
Figure 4.1 : Ocean Floor Figure 4.1 : Ocean Floor Figure 4.1 : Ocean Floor Figure 4.1 : Ocean Floor Figure 4.1 : Ocean Floor
Continental Margins
These form the transition between continental shores and deep-sea basins. They include continental shelf, continental slope, continental rise and deep-oceanic trenches. Of these, the deep-oceanic trenches are the areas which are of considerable interest in so far as the distribution of oceans and continents is concerned.
Reprint 2026-27
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY 30 available at the time Wegener put forth his concept of continental drift. Particularly, the mapping of the ocean floor and palaeomagnetic studies of rocks from oceanic regions revealed the following facts :
(i) It was realised that all along the mid- oceanic ridges, volcanic eruptions are common and they bring huge amounts of lava to the surface in this area.
(ii) The rocks equidistant on either sides of the crest of mid-oceanic ridges show remarkable similarities in terms of period of formation, chemical compositions and magnetic properties. Rocks closer to the mid-oceanic ridges have normal polarity and are the youngest. The age of the rocks increases as one moves away from the (iii) The ocean crust rocks are much younger than the continental rocks. The age of rocks in the oceanic crust is nowhere more than
200 million years old. Some of the continental rock formations are as old as 3,200 million (iv) The sediments on the ocean floor are unexpectedly very thin. Scientists were expecting, if the ocean floors were as old as the continent, to have a complete sequence of sediments for a period of much longer duration. However, nowhere was the sediment column found to be older than
200 million years.
(v) The deep trenches have deep-seated earthquake occurrences while in the mid- oceanic ridge areas, the quake foci have shallow depths.
These facts and a detailed analysis of magnetic properties of the rocks on either sides of the mid-oceanic ridge led Hess (1961) to propose his hypothesis, known as the “sea floor spreading”. Hess argued that constant eruptions at the crest of oceanic ridges cause the rupture of the oceanic crust and the new lava wedges into it, pushing the oceanic crust on either side. The ocean floor, thus spreads.
The younger age of the oceanic crust as well as the fact that the spreading of one ocean does not cause the shrinking of the other, made Hess
Figure 4. 2 : Distribution of earthquakes and volcanoes
Reprint 2026-27
DISTRIBUTION OF OCEANS AND CONTINENTS 31 think about the consumption of the oceanic crust. He further maintained that the ocean floor that gets pushed due to volcanic eruptions at the crest, sinks down at the oceanic trenches and gets consumed.
The basic concept of sea floor spreading has been depicted in Figure 4.3.
PLATE TECTONICS
Since the advent of the concept of sea floor spreading, the interest in the problem of distribution of oceans and continents was revived. It was in 1967, McKenzie and Parker and also Morgan, independently collected the available ideas and came out with another
Figure 4. 3 : Sea floor spreading
Figure 4.4 : Position of continents through geological past
The motions of the continents during the past 540 million years. 1. Africa; 2. South America;
3. Antarctica; 4. Australia; 5. India; 6. China; 7. North
America; 8. Europe; 9. and 10. Siberia (Emilani, 1992)
Reprint 2026-27
