FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY 32 concept termed Plate Tectonics. A tectonic plate (also called lithospheric plate) is a massive, irregularly-shaped slab of solid rock, generally composed of both continental and oceanic lithosphere. Plates move horizontally over the asthenosphere as rigid units. The lithosphere includes the crust and top mantle with its thickness range varying between
5 and100 km in oceanic parts and about 200 km in the continental areas. A plate may be referred to as the continental plate or oceanic plate depending on which of the two occupy a larger portion of the plate. Pacific plate is largely an oceanic plate whereas the Eurasian plate may be called a continental plate. The theory of plate tectonics proposes that the earth’s lithosphere is divided into seven major and some minor plates. Young Fold Mountain ridges, trenches, and/or faults surround these major plates (Figure 4.5). The major plates are as follows :
Figure 4.5 : Major and minor plates of the world
I Antarctica and the surrounding oceanic plate
II North American (with western Atlantic floor separated from the South American plate along the Caribbean islands) plate
III South American (with western Atlantic floor separated from the North American plate along the Caribbean islands) plate
IV Pacific plate
V India-Australia-New Zealand plate
VI Africa with the eastern Atlantic floor plate
VII Eurasia and the adjacent oceanic plate.
Some important minor plates are listed below:
(i) Cocos plate : Between Central America and Pacific plate (ii) Nazca plate : Between South America and Pacific plate (iii) Arabian plate : Mostly the Saudi Arabian landmass (iv) Philippine plate : Between the Asiatic and
Pacific plate
Reprint 2026-27
DISTRIBUTION OF OCEANS AND CONTINENTS 33 (v) Caroline plate : Between the Philippine and Indian plate (North of New Guinea)
These plates have been constantly moving over the globe throughout the history of the earth. It is not the continent that moves as believed by Wegener. Continents are part of a plate and what moves is the plate. Moreover, it may be noted that all the plates, without exception, have moved in the geological past, and shall continue to move in the future as well.
Wegener had thought of all the continents to have initially existed as a super continent in the form of Pangaea. However, later discoveries reveal that the continental masses, resting on the plates, have been wandering all through the geological period, and Pangaea was a result of converging of different continental masses that were parts of one or the other plates. Scientists using the palaeomagnetic data have determined the positions held by each of the present continental landmass in different geological periods (Fig 4.4). Position of the Indian sub- continent (mostly Peninsular India) is traced with the help of the rocks analysed from the
Nagpur area.
There are three types of plate boundaries:
Divergent Boundaries
Where new crust is generated as the plates pull away from each other. The sites where the plates move away from each other are called spreading sites. The best-known example of divergent boundaries is the Mid-Atlantic Ridge.
At this, the American Plate(s) is/are separated from the Eurasian and African Plates.
Convergent Boundaries
Where the crust is destroyed as one plate dived under another. The location where sinking of a plate occurs is called a subduction zone.
There are three ways in which convergence can occur. These are: (i) between an oceanic and continental plate; (ii) between two oceanic plates; and (iii) between two continental
Transform Boundaries
Where the crust is neither produced nor destroyed as the plates slide horizontally past each other. Transform faults are the planes of separation generally perpendicular to the mid- oceanic ridges. As the eruptions do not take all along the entire crest at the same time, there is a differential movement of a portion of the plate away from the axis of the earth. Also, the rotation of the earth has its effect on the separated blocks of the plate portions.
How do you think the rate of plate movement is determined?
Rates of Plate Movement
The strips of normal and reverse magnetic field that parallel the mid-oceanic ridges help scientists determine the rates of plate movement. These rates vary considerably. The
Arctic Ridge has the slowest rate (less than 2.5 cm/yr), and the East Pacific Rise near Easter
Island, in the South Pacific about 3,400 km west of Chile, has the fastest rate (more than
15 cm/yr).
Force for the Plate Movement
At the time that Wegener proposed his theory of continental drift, most scientists believed that the earth was a solid, motionless body.
However, concepts of sea floor spreading and the unified theory of plate tectonics have emphasised that both the surface of the earth and the interior are not static and motionless but are dynamic. The fact that the plates move is now a well-accepted fact. The mobile rock beneath the rigid plates is believed to be moving in a circular manner. The heated material rises to the surface, spreads and begins to cool, and then sinks back into deeper depths. This cycle is repeated over and over to generate what scientists call a convection cell or convective flow. Heat within the earth comes from two main sources: radioactive decay and residual heat. Arthur Holmes first considered
Reprint 2026-27
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY 34
Figure 4.6 : Movement of the Indian plate this idea in the 1930s, which later influenced
Harry Hess’ thinking about seafloor spreading.
The slow movement of hot, softened mantle that lies below the rigid plates is the driving force behind the plate movement.
MOVEMENT OF THE INDIAN PLATE
The Indian plate includes Peninsular India and the Australian continental portions. The subduction zone along the Himalayas forms the northern plate boundary in the form of continent— continent convergence. In the east, it extends through Rakinyoma Mountains of
Myanmar towards the island arc along the
Java T rench. The eastern margin is a spreading site lying to the east of Australia in the form of an oceanic ridge in SW Pacific. The
Western margin follows Kirthar Mountain of
Pakistan. It further extends along the Makrana coast and joins the spreading site from the
Red Sea rift southeastward along the Chagos
Archipelago. The boundary between India and the Antarctic plate is also marked by oceanic ridge (divergent boundary) running in roughly W-E direction and merging into the spreading site, a little south of New Zealand.
India was a large island situated off the
Australian coast, in a vast ocean. The Tethys
Sea separated it from the Asian continent till about 225 million years ago. India is supposed to have started her northward journey about
200 million years ago at the time when Pangaea broke. India collided with Asia about 40-50 million years ago causing rapid uplift of the
Himalayas. The positions of India since about
71 million years till the present are shown in the Figure 4.6. It also shows the position of the Indian subcontinent and the Eurasian plate. About 140 million years before the present, the subcontinent was located as south as 50oS. latitude. The two major plates were separated by the Tethys Sea and the
Tibetan block was closer to the Asiatic landmass. During the movement of the Indian plate towards the Eurasian plate, a major event that occurred was the outpouring of lava and formation of the Deccan Traps. This started somewhere around 60 million years ago and continued for a long period of time. Note that the subcontinent was still close to the equator.
From 40 million years ago and thereafter, the event of formation of the Himalayas took place.
Scientists believe that the process is still continuing and the height of the Himalayas is rising even to this date.
Reprint 2026-27
DISTRIBUTION OF OCEANS AND CONTINENTS 35
EXERCISES
1. Multiple choice questions.
(i) Who amongst the following was the first to consider the possibility of
Europe, Africa and America having been located side by side.
(a) Alfred Wegener (c) Abraham Ortelius (b) Antonio Pellegrini (d) Edmond Hess (ii) Polar fleeing force relates to:
(a) Revolution of the Earth (c) Rotation of the earth (b) Gravitation (d) Tides (iii) Which one of the following is not a minor plate?
(a) Nazca (c) Philippines (b) Arabia (d) Antarctica (iv) Which one of the following facts was not considered by those while discussing the concept of sea floor spreading?
(a) Volcanic activity along the mid-oceanic ridges.
(b) Stripes of normal and reverse magnetic field observed in rocks of ocean (c) Distribution of fossils in different continents.
(d) Age of rocks from the ocean floor.
(v) Which one of the following is the type of plate boundary of the Indian plate along the Himalayan mountains?
(a) Ocean-continent convergence (b) Divergent boundary (c) Transform boundary (d) Continent-continent convergence
2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) What were the forces suggested by Wegener for the movement of the continents?
(ii) How are the convectional currents in the mantle initiated and maintained?
(iii) What is the major difference between the transform boundary and the convergent or divergent boundaries of plates?
(iv) What was the location of the Indian landmass during the formation of the
Deccan Traps?
3. Answer the following questions in about 150 words.
(i) What are the evidences in support of the continental drift theory?
(ii) Bring about the basic difference between the drift theory and Plate tectonics.
(iii) What were the major post-drift discoveries that rejuvenated the interest of scientists in the study of distribution of oceans and continents?
Project Work
Prepare a collage related to damages caused by an earthquake.
Reprint 2026-27
