FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY 94 unstable and cause rainfall throughout the year. They occur in eastern United States of
America, southern and eastern China, southern Japan, northeastern Argentina, coastal south Africa and eastern coast of
Australia. The annual averages of precipitation vary from 75-150 cm. Thunderstorms in summer and frontal precipitation in winter are common. Mean monthly temperature in summer is around 27°C, and in winter it varies from 5°-12° C. The daily range of temperature is small.
Marine West Coast Climate (Cfb)
Marine west coast climate is located poleward from the Mediterranean climate on the west coast of the continents. The main areas are:
Northwestern Europe, west coast of North
America, north of California, southern Chile, southeastern Australia and New Zealand. Due to marine influence, the temperature is moderate and in winter, it is warmer than for its latitude. The mean temperature in summer months ranges from 15°-20°C and in winter
4°-10°C. The annual and daily ranges of temperature are small. Precipitation occurs throughout the year. Precipitation varies greatly from 50-250cm.
Cold Snow Forest Climates (D) Cold Snow Forest Climates (D) Cold Snow Forest Climates (D) Cold Snow Forest Climates (D) Cold Snow Forest Climates (D)
Cold snow forest climates occur in the large continental area in the northern hemisphere between 40°-70° north latitudes in Europe,
Asia and North America. Cold snow forest climates are divided into two types: (i) Df- cold climate with humid winter; (ii) Dw- cold climate with dry winter. The severity of winter is more pronounced in higher latitudes.
Cold Climate with Humid Winters (Df)
Cold climate with humid winter occurs poleward of marine west coast climate and mid latitude steppe. The winters are cold and snowy. The frost free season is short. The annual ranges of temperature are large. The weather changes are abrupt and short.
Poleward, the winters are more severe.
Cold Climate with Dry Winters (Dw)
Cold climate with dry winter occurs mainly over Northeastern Asia. The development of pronounced winter anti cyclone and its weakening in summer sets in monsoon like reversal of wind in this region. Poleward summer temperatures are lower and winter temperatures are extremely low with many locations experiencing below freezing point temperatures for up to seven months in a year.
Precipitation occurs in summer. The annual precipitation is low from 12-15 cm.
Polar Climates (E) Polar Climates (E) Polar Climates (E) Polar Climates (E) Polar Climates (E)
Polar climates exist poleward beyond 70° latitude. Polar climates consist of two types:
(i) Tundra (ET); (ii) Ice Cap (EF).
Tundra Climate (ET)
The tundra climate (ET) is so called after the types of vegetation, like low growing mosses, lichens and flowering plants. This is the region of permafrost where the sub soil is permanently frozen. The short growing season and water logging support only low growing plants.
During summer, the tundra regions have very long duration of day light.
Ice Cap Climate (EF)
The ice cap climate (EF) occurs over interior
Greenland and Antartica. Even in summer, the temperature is below freezing point. This area receives very little precipitation. The snow and ice get accumulated and the mounting pressure causes the deformation of the ice sheets and they break. They move as icebergs that float in the Arctic and Antarctic waters. Plateau
Station, Antarctica ,79°S, portray this climate.
Reprint 2026-27
WORLD CLIMATE AND CLIMATE CHANGE 95
C C C C CLIM LIM LIM LIM LIMATE ATE ATE ATE ATE C C C C CHANGE HANGE HANGE HANGE HANGE
The earlier chapters on climate summarised our understanding of climate as it prevails now.
The type of climate we experience now might be prevailing over the last 10,000 years with minor and occasionally wide fluctuations. The planet earth has witnessed many variations in climate since the beginning. Geological records show alteration of glacial and inter-glacial periods. The geomorphological features, especially in high altitudes and high latitudes, exhibit traces of advances and retreats of glaciers. The sediment deposits in glacial lakes also reveal the occurrence of warm and cold periods. The rings in the trees provide clues about wet and dry periods. Historical records describe the vagaries in climate. All these evidences indicate that change in climate is a natural and continuous process.
India also witnessed alternate wet and dry periods. Archaeological findings show that the
Rajasthan desert experienced wet and cool climate around 8,000 B.C. The period 3,000-
1,700 B.C. had higher rainfall. From about
2,000-1,700 B.C., this region was the centre of the Harappan civilisation. Dry conditions accentuated since then.
In the geological past, the earth was warm some 500-300 million years ago, through the
Cambrian, Ordovician and Silurian periods.
During the Pleistocene epoch, glacial and inter-glacial periods occurred, the last major peak glacial period was about 18,000 years ago. The present inter-glacial period started
10,000 years ago.
Climate in the recent past Climate in the recent past Climate in the recent past Climate in the recent past Climate in the recent past
Variability in climate occurs all the time. The nineties decade of the last century witnessed extreme weather events. The 1990s recorded the warmest temperature of the century and some of the worst floods around the world. The worst devastating drought in the Sahel region, south of the Sahara desert, from 1967-1977 is one such variability. During the 1930s, severe drought occurred in southwestern Great
Plains of the United States, described as the dust bowl. Historical records of crop yield or crop failures, of floods and migration of people tell about the effects of changing climate. A number of times Europe witnessed warm, wet, cold and dry periods, the significant episodes were the warm and dry conditions in the tenth and eleventh centuries, when the Vikings settled in Greenland. Europe witnessed “Little
Ice Age” from 1550 to about 1850. From about
1885-1940 world temperature showed an upward trend. After 1940, the rate of increase in temperature slowed down.
Causes of Climate Change Causes of Climate Change Causes of Climate Change Causes of Climate Change Causes of Climate Change
The causes for climate change are many. They can be grouped into astronomical and terrestrial causes. The astronomical causes are the changes in solar output associated with sunspot activities. Sunspots are dark and cooler patches on the sun which increase and decrease in a cyclical manner. According to some meteorologists, when the number of sunspots increase, cooler and wetter weather and greater storminess occur. A decrease in sunspot numbers is associated with warm and drier conditions. Yet, these findings are not statistically significant.
An another astronomical theory is
Millankovitch oscillations, which infer cycles in the variations in the earth’s orbital characteristics around the sun, the wobbling of the earth and the changes in the earth’s axial tilt. All these alter the amount of insolation received from the sun, which in turn, might have a bearing on the climate.
Volcanism is considered as another cause for climate change. Volcanic eruption throws up lots of aerosols into the atmosphere. These aerosols remain in the atmosphere for a considerable period of time reducing the sun’s radiation reaching the Earth’s surface. After the recent Pinatoba and El Cion volcanic eruptions, the average temperature of the earth fell to some extent for some years.
The most important anthropogenic effect on the climate is the increasing trend in the concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere which is likely to cause global warming.
Reprint 2026-27
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY 96
Global Warming
Due to the presence of greenhouse gases, the atmosphere is behaving like a greenhouse. The atmosphere also transmits the incoming solar radiation but absorbs the vast majority of long wave radiation emitted upwards by the earth’s surface. The gases that absorb long wave radiation are called greenhouse gases. The processes that warm the atmosphere are often collectively referred to as the greenhouse effect.
The term greenhouse is derived from the analogy to a greenhouse used in cold areas for preserving heat. A greenhouse is made up of glass. The glass which is transparent to incoming short wave solar radiation is opaque to outgoing long wave radiation. The glass, therefore, allows in more radiation and prevents the long wave radiation going outside the glass house, causing the temperature inside the glasshouse structure warmer than outside. When you enter a car or a bus, during summers, where windows are closed, you feel more heat than outside.
Likewise during winter the vehicles with closed doors and windows remain warmer than the temperature outside. This is another example of the greenhouse effect.
Greenhouse Gases(GHGs)
The primary GHGs of concern today are carbon dioxide (CO2), Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O) and ozone (O3). Some other gases such as nitric oxide (NO)
and carbon monoxide (CO) easily react with
GHGs and affect their concentration in the atmosphere.
The effectiveness of any given GHG molecule will depend on the magnitude of the increase in its concentration, its life time in the atmosphere and the wavelength of radiation that it absorbs. The chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) are highly effective. Ozone which absorbs ultra violet radiation in the stratosphere is very effective in absorbing terrestrial radiation when it is present in the lower troposphere. Another important point to be noted is that the more time the GHG molecule remains in the atmosphere, the longer it will take for earth’s atmospheric system to recover from any change brought about by the
The largest concentration of GHGs in the atmosphere is carbon dioxide. The emission of CO2 comes mainly from fossil fuel combustion (oil, gas and coal). Forests and oceans are the sinks for the carbon dioxide.
Forests use CO2 in their growth. So, deforestation due to changes in land use, also increases the concentration of Co2. The time taken for atmospheric CO2 to adjust to changes in sources to sinks is 20-50 years. It is rising at about 0.5 per cent annually. Doubling of concentration of CO2 over pre-industrial level is used as an index for estimating the changes in climate in climatic models.
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) are products of human activity. Ozone occurs in the stratosphere where ultra-violet rays convert oxygen into ozone. Thus, ultra violet rays do not reach the earth’s surface. The CFCs which drift into the stratosphere destroy the ozone.
Large depletion of ozone occurs over Antarctica.
The depletion of ozone concentration in the stratosphere is called the ozone hole. This allows the ultra violet rays to pass through the troposphere.
International efforts have been initiated for reducing the emission of GHGs into the atmosphere. The most important one is the
Kyoto protocol proclaimed in 1997. This protocol went into effect in 2005, ratified by
141 nations. Kyoto protocol bounds the 35 industrialised countries to reduce their emissions by the year 2012 to 5 per cent less than the levels prevalent in the year 1990.
The increasing trend in the concentration of GHGs in the atmosphere may, in the long run, warm up the earth. Once the global warming sets in, it will be difficult to reverse it.
The effect of global warming may not be uniform everywhere. Nevertheless, the adverse effect due to global warming will adversely affect the life supporting system. Rise in the sea level due to melting of glaciers and ice-caps and thermal expansion of the sea may inundate large parts of the coastal area and islands, leading to social problems. This is another cause for serious concern for the world
Reprint 2026-27
WORLD CLIMATE AND CLIMATE CHANGE 97 community. Efforts have already been initiated to control the emission of GHGs and to arrest the trend towards global warming. Let us hope the world community responds to this challenge and adopts a lifestyle that leaves behind a livable world for the generations to come.
One of the major concerns of the world today is global warming. Let us look at how much the planet has warmed up from the temperature records.
The annual average near -surface air temperature of the world is approximately 14oC.
An increasing trend in temperature was discernible in the 20th century. The greatest warming of the 20th century was during the two periods, 1901-44 and 1977-99. Over each of these two periods, global temperatures rose by about 0.4oC. In between, there was a slight cooling, which was more marked in the
Northern Hemisphere.
The globally averaged annual mean temperature at the end of the 20th century was about 0.6oC above that recorded at the end of the 19th century. The seven warmest years during the 1856-2000 were recorded in the last decade. The year 1998 was the warmest year, probably not only for the 20th century but also for the whole millennium.
Write an explanatory note on “global warming”.
Reprint 2026-27
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY 98
EXERCISES
1. Multiple choice questions.
(i) Which one of the following is suitable for Koeppen’s “A” type of climate?
(a) High rainfall in all the months (b) Mean monthly temperature of the coldest month more than freezing (c) Mean monthly temperature of all the months more than 18o C (d) Average temperature for all the months below 10° C (ii) Koeppen’s system of classification of climates can be termed as :
(a) Applied (b) Systematic (c) Genetic (d) Empirical (iii) Most of the Indian Peninsula will be grouped according to Koeppen’s system (a) “Af” (b) “BSh” (c) “Cfb” (d) “Am” (iv) Which one of the following years is supposed to have recorded the warmest temperature the world over?
(a) 1990 (b) 1998 (c) 1885 (d) 1950 (v) Which one of the following groups of four climates represents humid conditions?
(a) A—B—C—E (b) A—C—D—E (c) B—C—D—E (d) A—C—D—F
2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) Which two climatic variables are used by Koeppen for classification of the climate?
(ii) How is the “genetic” system of classification different from the “empirical (iii) Which types of climates have very low range of temperature?
(iv) What type of climatic conditions would prevail if the sun spots increase?
3. Answer the following questions in about 150 words.
(i) Make a comparison of the climatic conditions between the “A” and “B” types of climate.
(ii) What type of vegetation would you find in the “C” and “A” type(s) of climate?
(iii) What do you understand by the term “Greenhouse Gases”? Make a list of greenhouse gases.
Project Work
Collect information about Kyoto declaration related to global climate changes.
Reprint 2026-27
WATER (OCEANS)
This unit deals with
• Hydrological Cycle
• Oceans — submarine relief; distribution of temperature and salinity; movements of ocean water-waves, tides and currents
Reprint 2026-27
WATER (OCEANS)
the ocean to land and land to ocean. The hydrological cycle describes the movement of water on, in, and above the earth. The water cycle has been working for billions of years and all the life on earth depends on it. Next to air, water is the most important element required for the existence of life on earth. The distribution of water on earth is quite uneven.
Many locations have plenty of water while others have very limited quantity. The hydrological cycle, is the circulation of water within the earth’s hydrosphere in different forms i.e. the liquid, solid and the gaseous phases. It also refers to the continuous exchange of water between the oceans,
Figure 12.1 : Hydrological Cycle
Can we think of life without water? It is said that the water is life. Water is an essential component of all life forms that exist over the surface of the earth. The creatures on the earth are lucky that it is a water planet, otherwise we all would have no existence. Water is a rare commodity in our solar system. There is no water on the sun or anywhere else in the solar system. The earth, fortunately has an abundant supply of water on its surface. Hence, our planet is called the ‘Blue Planet’.
HYDROLOGICAL CYCLE
Water is a cyclic resource. It can be used and re-used. Water also undergoes a cycle from
C H A P T E R
Reprint 2026-27
WATER (OCEANS) 101 atmosphere, landsurface and subsurface and the organisms.
About 91 per cent of the planetary water is found in the oceans. The remaining is held as freshwater in glaciers and icecaps, groundwater sources, lakes, soil moisture, atmosphere, streams and within life. Nearly
59 per cent of the water that falls on land returns to the atmosphere through evaporation from over the oceans as well as from other places. The remainder runs-off on the surface, infiltrates into the ground or a part of it becomes glacier.
It is to be noted that the renewable water on the earth is constant while the demand is increasing tremendously. This leads to water crisis in different parts of the world — spatially and temporally. The pollution of river waters has further aggravated the crisis. How can you intervene in improving the water quality and augmenting the available quantity of
RELIEF OF THE OCEAN FLOOR
The oceans are confined to the great depressions of the earth’s outer layer. In this section, we shall see the nature of the ocean basins of the earth and their topography. The oceans, unlike the continents, merge so naturally into one another that it is hard to demarcate them. The geographers have divided the oceanic part of the earth into five oceans, namely the Pacific, the Atlantic, the Indian,
Southern ocean and the Arctic. The various seas, bays, gulfs and other inlets are parts of these four large oceans.
A major portion of the ocean floor is found between 3-6 km below the sea level. The ‘land’ under the waters of the oceans, that is, the
