FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY 104
Antartic circles, the surface water temperatures are close to 0° C and so the temperature change with the depth is very slight. Here, only one layer of cold water exists, which extends from surface to deep ocean floor.
The average temperature of surface water of the oceans is about 27°C and it gradually decreases from the equator towards the poles. The rate of decrease of temperature with increasing latitude is generally 0.5°C per latitude. The average temperature is around 22°C at 20° latitudes, 14° C at 40° latitudes and 0° C near poles. The oceans in the northern hemisphere record relatively higher temperature than in the southern hemisphere. The highest temperature is not recorded at the equator but slightly towards n o r t h o f i t . T h e a v e r a g e a n n u a l temperatures for the northern and southern hemisphere are around 19° C and 16° C respectively. This variation is due to the unequal distribution of land and water in the northern and southern hemispheres.
Figure 12.4 shows the spatial pattern of surface temperature of the oceans.
It is a well known fact that the maximum temperature of the oceans is always at their surfaces because they directly receive the heat from the sun and the heat is transmitted to the lower sections of the oceans through the process of convection. It results into decrease of temperature with the increasing depth, but the rate of decrease is not uniform throughout. The temperature falls very rapidly up to the depth of 200 m and thereafter, the rate of decrease of temperature is slowed down.
SALINITY OF OCEAN WATERS
All waters in nature, whether rain water or ocean water, contain dissolved mineral salts.
Salinity is the term used to define the total content of dissolved salts in sea water (Table 12.4). It is calculated as the amount of salt (in gm) dissolved in 1,000 gm (1 kg) of seawater. It is usually expressed as parts per thousand (o/oo) or ppt. Salinity is an important property of sea water. Salinity of 24.7 o/oo has been considered as the upper limit to demarcate ‘brackish water’.
Factors af fecting ocean salinity are mentioned below:
(i) The salinity of water in the surface layer of oceans depend mainly on evaporation and precipitation.
(ii) Surface salinity is greatly influenced in coastal regions by the fresh water flow from rivers, and in polar regions by the processes of freezing and thawing of (iii) Wind, also influences salinity of an area by transferring water to other areas.
(iv) The ocean currents contribute to the salinity variations. Salinity, temperature and density of water are interrelated.
Hence, any change in the temperature or density influences the salinity of water in an area.
Highest salinity in water bodies
Lake Van in Turkey (330 o/oo),
Dead Sea (238 o/oo),
Great Salt Lake (220 o/oo)
Figure 12.3 : Thermocline
Reprint 2026-27
WATER (OCEANS) 105
The North Sea, in spite of its location in higher latitudes, records higher salinity due to more saline water brought by the North
Atlantic Drift. Baltic Sea records low salinity due to influx of river waters in large quantity. The Mediterranean Sea records higher salinity due to high evaporation.
Salinity is, however, very low in Black Sea due to enormous fresh water influx by rivers.
See the atlas to find out the rivers joining
Black Sea.
The average salinity of the Indian Ocean is 35 o/oo. The low salinity trend is observed in the Bay of Bengal due to influx of river water. On the contrary, the Arabian Sea shows higher salinity due to high evaporation and low influx of fresh water. Figure 12.5 shows the salinity of the World’s oceans.
Vertical Distribution of Salinity
Salinity changes with depth, but the way it changes depends upon the location of the
Figure 12.4 : Spatial pattern of surface temperature (°C) of the oceans
HORIZONTAL DISTRIBUTION OF SALINITY
The salinity for normal open ocean ranges between 33o/oo and 37 o/oo. In the land locked Red Sea, it is as high as 41o/oo, while in the estuaries and the Arctic, the salinity fluctuates from 0 - 35 o/oo, seasonally. In hot and dry regions, where evaporation is high, the salinity sometimes reaches to 70 o/oo.
The salinity variation in the Pacific Ocean is mainly due to its shape and larger areal extent. Salinity decreases from 35 o/oo - 31 o/oo on the western parts of the northern hemisphere because of the influx of melted water from the
Arctic region. In the same way, after 15° - 20° south, it decreases to 33 o/oo .
The average salinity of the Atlantic
Ocean is around 36 o/oo. The highest salinity is recorded between 15° and 20° latitudes.
Maximum salinity (37 o/oo) is observed between 20° N and 30° N and 20° W - 60° W.
It gradually decreases towards the north.
Reprint 2026-27
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY 106 sea. Salinity at the surface increases by the loss of water to ice or evaporation, or decreased by the input of fresh waters, such as from the rivers. Salinity at depth is very much fixed, because there is no way that water is ‘lost’, or the salt is ‘added.’ There is a marked difference in the salinity between the surface zones and the deep zones of the oceans. The lower salinity water rests above
Figure12.5 : Surface salinity of the World’s Oceans the higher salinity dense water. Salinity, generally, increases with depth and there is a distinct zone called the halocline, where salinity increases sharply. Other factors being constant, increasing salinity of seawater causes its density to increase. High salinity seawater, generally, sinks below the lower salinity water. This leads to stratification by salinity.
EXERCISES
1. Multiple choice questions.
(i) Identify the element which is not a part of the hydrological cycle (a) Evaporation (c) Precipitation (b) Hydration (d) Condensation (ii) The average depth of continental slope varies between (a) 2–20m (c) 20–200m (b) 200–2,000m (d) 2,000–20,000m
120º 60º 60º 120º
Reprint 2026-27
WATER (OCEANS) 107 (iii) Which one of the following is not a minor relief feature in the oceans:
(a) Seamount (c) Oceanic Deep (b) Atoll (d) Guyot (iv) Salinity is expressed as the amount of salt in grams dissolved in sea water per (a) 10 gm (c) 100 gm (b) 1,000 gm (d) 10,000 gm (v) Which one of the following is the smallest ocean:
(a) Indian Ocean (c) Atlantic Ocean (b) Arctic Ocean (d) Pacific Ocean
2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) Why do we call the earth a Blue Planet?
(ii) What is a continental margin?
(iii) List out the deepest trenches of various oceans.
(iv) What is a thermocline?
(v) When you move into the ocean what thermal layers would you encounter?
Why the temperature varies with depth?
(vi) What is salinity of sea water?
3. Answer the following questions in about 150 words.
(i) How are various elements of the hydrological cycle interrelated?
(ii) Examine the factors that influence the temperature distribution of the
Project Work (i) Consult the atlas and show ocean floor relief on the outline of the world (ii) Identify the areas of mid oceanic ridges from the Indian Ocean.
Reprint 2026-27
MOVEMENTS OF OCEAN WATER
T he ocean water is dynamic. Its physical characteristics like temperature, salinity, density and the external forces like of the sun, moon and the winds influence the movement of ocean water. The horizontal and vertical motions are common in ocean water bodies. The horizontal motion refers to the ocean currents and waves. The vertical motion refers to tides. Ocean currents are the continuous flow of huge amount of water in a definite direction while the waves are the horizontal motion of water. Water moves ahead from one place to another through ocean currents while the water in the waves does not move, but the wave trains move ahead. The vertical motion refers to the rise and fall of water in the oceans and seas. Due to attraction of the sun and the moon, the ocean water is raised up and falls down twice a day. The upwelling of cold water from subsurface and the sinking of surface water are also forms of vertical motion of ocean water.
Waves are actually the energy, not the water as such, which moves across the ocean surface.
Water particles only travel in a small circle as a wave passes. Wind provides energy to the waves. Wind causes waves to travel in the ocean and the energy is released on shorelines. The motion of the surface water seldom affects the stagnant deep bottom water of the oceans. As a wave approaches the beach, it slows down.
This is due to the friction occurring between the dynamic water and the sea floor. And, when the depth of water is less than half the wavelength of the wave, the wave breaks. The largest waves are found in the open oceans.
Waves continue to grow larger as they move and absorb energy from the wind.
Most of the waves are caused by the wind driving against water. When a breeze of two knots or less blows over calm water, small ripples form and grow as the wind speed increases until white caps appear in the breaking waves. Waves may travel thousands of km before rolling ashore, breaking and dissolving as surf.
A wave’s size and shape reveal its origin.
Steep waves are fairly young ones and are probably formed by local wind. Slow and steady waves originate from far away places, possibly from another hemisphere. The maximum wave height is determined by the strength of the wind, i.e. how long it blows and the area over which it blows in a single direction.
Waves travel because wind pushes the water body in its course while gravity pulls the crests of the waves downward. The falling water pushes the former troughs upward, and the
Figure13.1 : Motion of waves and water molecules
C H A P T E R
Reprint 2026-27
