MOVEMENTS OF OCEAN WATER 109 wave moves to a new position (Figure 13.1).
The actual motion of the water beneath the waves is circular. It indicates that things are carried up and forward as the wave approaches, and down and back as it passes.
Characteristics of Waves
Wave crest and trough : The highest and lowest points of a wave are called the crest and trough respectively.
Wave height : It is the vertical distance from the bottom of a trough to the top of a crest of a wave.
Wave amplitude : It is one-half of the wave
Wave period : It is merely the time interval between two successive wave crests or troughs as they pass a fixed point.
Wavelength : It is the horizontal distance between two successive crests.
Wave speed : It is the rate at which the wave moves through the water, and is measured in knots.
Wave frequency : It is the number of waves passing a given point during a one- second time interval.
The periodical rise and fall of the sea level, once or twice a day, mainly due to the attraction of the sun and the moon, is called a tide.
Movement of water caused by meteorological effects (winds and atmospheric pressure changes) are called surges. Surges are not regular like tides. The study of tides is very complex, spatially and temporally, as it has great variations in frequency, magnitude and height.
The moon’s gravitational pull to a great extent and to a lesser extent the sun’s gravitational pull, are the major causes for the occurrence of tides. Another factor is centrifugal force, which is the force that acts to counter balance the gravity. Together, the gravitational pull and the centrifugal force are responsible for creating the two major tidal bulges on the earth. On the side of the earth facing the moon, a tidal bulge occurs while on the opposite side though the gravitational attraction of the moon is less as it is farther away, the centrifugal force causes tidal bulge on the other side (Figure 13.2).
The ‘tide-generating’ force is the difference between these two forces; i.e. the gravitational attraction of the moon and the centrifugal force.
On the surface of the earth, nearest the moon, pull or the attractive force of the moon is greater than the centrifugal force, and so there is a net force causing a bulge towards the moon. On the opposite side of the earth, the attractive force is less, as it is farther away from the moon, the centrifugal force is dominant. Hence, there is a net force away from the moon. It creates the second bulge away from the moon. On the surface of the earth, the horizontal tide generating forces are more important than the vertical forces in generating the tidal bulges.
Figure13.2 : Relation between gravitational forces and tides
The tidal bulges on wide continental shelves, have greater height. When tidal bulges hit the mid-oceanic islands they become low.
The shape of bays and estuaries along a coastline can also magnify the intensity of tides.
Funnel-shaped bays greatly change tidal magnitudes. When the tide is channelled between islands or into bays and estuaries they are called tidal currents.
Reprint 2026-27
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY 110
Tides of Bay of Fundy, Canada
The highest tides in the world occur in the Bay of Fundy in Nova Scotia, Canada.
The tidal bulge is 15 - 16 m. Because there are two high tides and two low tides every day (roughly a 24 hour period); then a tide must come in within about a six hour period. As a rough estimate, the tide rises about 240 cm an hour (1,440 cm divided by 6 hours). If you have walked down a beach with a steep cliff alongside (which is common there), make sure you watch the tides. If you walk for about an hour and then notice that the tide is coming in, the water will be over your head before you get back to where you started!
Types of Tides
Tides vary in their frequency, direction and movement from place to place and also from time to time. Tides may be grouped into various types based on their frequency of occurrence in one day or 24 hours or based on their height.
Tides based on Frequency
Semi-diurnal tide : The most common tidal pattern, featuring two high tides and two low tides each day. The successive high or low tides are approximately of the same height.
Diurnal tide : There is only one high tide and one low tide during each day. The successive high and low tides are approximately of the same height.
Mixed tide : Tides having variations in height are known as mixed tides. These tides generally occur along the west coast of North America and on many islands of the Pacific Ocean.
Tides based on the Sun, Moon and the Earth
Positions
The height of rising water (high tide) varies appreciably depending upon the position of sun and moon with respect to the earth.
Spring tides and neap tides come under this category.
Spring tides : The position of both the sun and the moon in relation to the earth has direct bearing on tide height. When the sun, the moon and the earth are in a straight line, the height of the tide will be higher. These are called spring tides and they occur twice a month, one on full moon period and another during new moon
Neap tides : Normally, there is a seven day interval between the spring tides and neap tides. At this time the sun and moon are at right angles to each other and the forces of the sun and moon tend to counteract one another.
The Moon’s attraction, though more than twice as strong as the sun’s, is diminished by the counteracting force of the sun’s gravitational
Once in a month, when the moon’s orbit is closest to the earth (perigee), unusually high and low tides occur. During this time the tidal range is greater than normal. Two weeks later, when the moon is farthest from earth (apogee), the moon’s gravitational force is limited and the tidal ranges are less than their average heights.
When the earth is closest to the sun (perihelion), around 3rd January each year, tidal ranges are also much greater, with unusually high and unusually low tides. When the earth is farthest from the sun (aphelion), around 4th July each year, tidal ranges are much less than average.
The time between the high tide and low tide, when the water level is falling, is called the ebb.
The time between the low tide and high tide, when the tide is rising, is called the flow or flood.
Importance of Tides
Since tides are caused by the earth-moon-sun positions which are known accurately, the tides can be predicted well in advance. This helps the navigators and fishermen plan their activities. Tidal flows are of great importance in navigation. Tidal heights are very important, especially harbours near rivers and within estuaries having shallow ‘bars’ at the entrance, which prevent ships and boats from entering into the harbour. Tides are also helpful in
Reprint 2026-27
MOVEMENTS OF OCEAN WATER 111 desilting the sediments and in removing polluted water from river estuaries. Tides are used to generate electrical power (in Canada,
France, Russia, and China). A 3 MW tidal power project at Durgaduani in Sunderbans of West Bengal is under way.
OCEAN CURRENTS
Ocean currents are like river flow in oceans.
They represent a regular volume of water in a definite path and direction. Ocean currents are influenced by two types of forces namely :
(i) primary forces that initiate the movement of water; (ii) secondary forces that influence the currents to flow.
The primary forces that influence the currents are: (i) heating by solar energy;
(ii) wind; (iii) gravity; (iv) coriolis force. Heating by solar energy causes the water to expand.
That is why, near the equator the ocean water is about 8 cm higher in level than in the middle latitudes. This causes a very slight gradient and water tends to flow down the slope. Wind blowing on the surface of the ocean pushes the water to move. Friction between the wind and the water surface affects the movement of the water body in its course. Gravity tends to pull the water down the pile and create gradient variation. The Coriolis force intervenes and causes the water to move to the right in the northern hemisphere and to the left in the southern hemisphere. These large accumulations of water and the flow around them are called
Gyres. These produce large circular currents in all the ocean basins.
Differences in water density affect vertical mobility of ocean currents. Water with high salinity is denser than water with low salinity and in the same way cold water is denser than warm water. Denser water tends to sink, while relatively lighter water tends to rise. Cold-water ocean currents occur when the cold water at the poles sinks and slowly moves towards the equator. Warm-water currents travel out from the equator along the surface, flowing towards the poles to replace the sinking cold water.
Types of Ocean Currents
The ocean currents may be classified based on their depth as surface currents and deep water currents : (i) surface currents constitute about
10 per cent of all the water in the ocean, these waters are the upper 400 m of the ocean;
(ii) deep water currents make up the other 90 per cent of the ocean water. These waters move around the ocean basins due to variations in the density and gravity. Deep waters sink into the deep ocean basins at high latitudes, where the temperatures are cold enough to cause the density to increase.
Ocean currents can also be classified based on temperature : as cold currents and warm currents: (i) cold currents bring cold water into warm water areas. These currents are usually found on the west coast of the continents in the low and middle latitudes (true in both hemispheres) and on the east coast in the higher latitudes in the Northern
Hemisphere; (ii) warm currents bring warm water into cold water areas and are usually observed on the east coast of continents in the low and middle latitudes (true in both hemispheres). In the northern hemisphere they are found on the west coasts of continents in high latitudes.
Major Ocean Currents
Major ocean currents are greatly influenced by the stresses exerted by the prevailing winds and coriolis force. The oceanic circulation pattern roughly corresponds to the earth’s atmospheric circulation pattern. The air circulation over the oceans in the middle latitudes is mainly anticyclonic (more pronounced in the southern hemisphere than in the northern hemisphere).
The oceanic circulation pattern also corresponds with the same. At higher latitudes,
Characteristics of Ocean Currents
Currents are referred to by their “drift”.
Usually, the currents are strongest near the surface and may attain speeds over five knots. At depths, currents are generally slow with speeds less than 0.5 knots. We refer to the speed of a current as its “drift.” Drift is measured in terms of knots. The strength of a current refers to the speed of the current. A fast current is considered strong. A current is usually strongest at the surface and decreases in strength (speed) with depth. Most currents have speeds less than or equal to 5 knots.
Reprint 2026-27
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY 112 where the wind flow is mostly cyclonic, the oceanic circulation follows this pattern. In regions of pronounced monsoonal flow, the monsoon winds influence the current movements. Due to the coriolis force, the warm currents from low latitudes tend to move to the right in the northern hemisphere and to their left in the southern hemisphere.
The oceanic circulation transports heat from one latitude belt to another in a manner similar to the heat transported by the general circulation of the atmosphere. The cold waters of the Arctic and Antarctic circles move towards warmer water in tropical and equatorial regions, while the warm waters of the lower latitudes move polewards. The major currents in the different oceans are shown in Figure13.3.
Prepare a list of currents which are found in Pacific, Atlantic and Indian
How is the movement of currents influenced by prevailing winds? Give some examples from Figure13.3.
Effects of Ocean Currents
Ocean currents have a number of direct and indirect influences on human activities. West coasts of the continents in tropical and subtropical latitudes (except close to the equator) are bordered by cool waters. Their average temperatures are relatively low with a narrow diurnal and annual ranges. There is fog, but generally the areas are arid. West coasts of the continents in the middle and higher latitudes are bordered by warm waters which cause a distinct marine climate. They are characterised by cool summers and relatively mild winters with a narrow annual range of temperatures. Warm currents flow parallel to the east coasts of the continents in tropical and subtropical latitudes. This results in warm and rainy climates. These areas lie in the western margins of the subtropical anti-cyclones. The mixing of warm and cold currents help to replenish the oxygen and favour the growth of planktons, the primary food for fish population.
The best fishing grounds of the world exist mainly in these mixing zones.
Fig.13.3 : Major currents in the Pacific, Atlantic and Indian oceans
Reprint 2026-27
MOVEMENTS OF OCEAN WATER 113
EXERCISES
1. Multiple choice questions.
(i) Upward and downward movement of ocean water is known as the :
(a) tide (c) wave (b) current (d) none of the above (ii) Spring tides are caused :
(a) As result of the moon and the sun pulling the earth gravitationally in the same direction.
(b) As result of the moon and the sun pulling the earth gravitationally in the opposite direction.
(c) Indention in the coast line.
(d) None of the above.
(iii) The distance between the earth and the moon is minimum when the moon (a) Aphelion (c) Perihelion (b) Perigee (d) Apogee (iv) The earth reaches its perihelion in:
(a) October (c) July (b) September (d) January
2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) What are waves?
(ii) Where do waves in the ocean get their energy from?
(iii) What are tides?
(iv) How are tides caused?
(v) How are tides related to navigation?
3. Answer the following questions in about 150 words.
(i) How do currents affect the temperature? How does it affect the temperature of coastal areas in the N. W. Europe?
(ii) What are the causes of currents?
Project Work (i) Visit a lake or a pond and observe the movement of waves. Throw a stone and notice how waves are generated.
(ii) Take a globe and a map showing the currents of the oceans. Discuss why certain currents are warm or cold and why they deflect in certain places and examine the reasons.
Reprint 2026-27
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY 114
LIFE ON THE EARTH
This unit deals with
• Biosphere — biodiversity and conservation
Reprint 2026-27
BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION
You have already learnt about the geomorphic processes particularly weathering and depth of weathering mantle in different climatic zones. See the
Figure 5.2 in Chapter 5 in order to recapitulate.
You should know that this weathering mantle is the basis for the diversity of vegetation and hence, the biodiversity. The basic cause for such weathering variations and resultant biodiversity is the input of solar energy and water. No wonder that the areas that are rich in these inputs are the areas of wide spectrum of biodiversity.
Biodiversity as we have today is the result of 2.5-3.5 billion years of evolution. Before the advent of humans, our earth supported more biodiversity than in any other period. Since, the emergence of humans, however, biodiversity has begun a rapid decline, with one species after another bearing the brunt of extinction due to overuse. The number of species globally vary from 2 million to 100 million, with 10 million being the best estimate.
New species are regularly discovered most of which are yet to be classified (an estimate states that about 40 per cent of fresh water fishes from South America are not classified yet). Tropical forests are very rich in bio-diversity.
Biodiversity is a system in constant evolution, from a view point of species, as well as from view point of an individual organism.
The average half-life of a species is estimated at between one and four million years, and 99 per cent of the species that have ever lived on the earth are today extinct. Biodiversity is not found evenly on the earth. It is consistently richer in the tropics. As one approaches the polar regions, one finds larger and larger populations of fewer and fewer species.
Biodiversity itself is a combination of two words, Bio (life) and diversity (variety). In simple terms, biodiversity is the number and variety of organisms found within a specified geographic region. It refers to the varieties of plants, animals and micro-organisms, the genes they contain and the ecosystems they form. It relates to the variability among living organisms on the earth, including the variability within and between the species and that within and between the ecosystems.
Biodiversity is our living wealth. It is a result of hundreds of millions of years of evolutionary history.
Biodiversity can be discussed at three levels : (i) Genetic diversity; (ii) Species diversity;
(iii) Ecosystem diversity.
Genetic Diversity
Genes are the basic building blocks of various life forms. Genetic biodiversity refers to the variation of genes within species. Groups of individual organisms having certain similarities in their physical characteristics are called species. Human beings genetically belong to the homo sapiens group and also differ in their characteristics such as height, colour, physical appearance, etc., considerably.
This is due to genetic diversity. This genetic diversity is essential for a healthy breeding of population of species.
C H A P T E R
Reprint 2026-27
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY 116
Species Diversity
This refers to the variety of species. It relates to the number of species in a defined area. The diversity of species can be measured through its richness, abundance and types. Some areas are more rich in species than others.
