BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION 117 ecosystems of which we are also a species. This fact must be drawn upon every one of us so that we live and let other species also live their
It is our ethical responsibility to consider that each and every species along with us have an intrinsic right to exist. Hence, it is morally wrong to voluntarily cause the extinction of any species. The level of biodiversity is a good indicator of the state of our relationships with other living species. In fact, the concept of biodiversity is an integral part of many human cultures.
LOSS OF BIODIVERSITY
Since the last few decades, growth in human population has increased the rate of consumption of natural resources. It has accelerated the loss of species and habitation in different parts of the world. Tropical regions which occupy only about one-fourth of the total area of the world, contain about three- fourth of the world human population. Over- exploitation of resources and deforestation have become rampant to fulfil the needs of large population. As these tropical rain forests contain 50 per cent of the species on the earth, destruction of natural habitats have proved disastrous for the entire biosphere.
Natural calamities such as earthquakes, floods, volcanic eruptions, forest fires, droughts, etc. cause damage to the flora and fauna of the earth, bringing change the biodiversity of respective affected regions.
Pesticides and other pollutants such as hydrocarbons and toxic heavy metals destroy the weak and sensitive species. Species which are not the natural inhabitants of the local habitat but are introduced into the system, are called exotic species. There are many examples when a natural biotic community of the ecosystem suffered extensive damage because of the introduction of exotic species.
During the last few decades, some animals like tigers, elephants, rhinoceros, crocodiles, minks and birds were hunted mercilessly by poachers for their horn, tusks, hides, etc. It has resulted in the rendering of certain types of organisms as endangered category.
The International Union of Conservation of
Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) has classified the threatened species of plants and animals into three categories for the purpose of their conservation.
Endangered Species
It includes those species which are in danger of extinction. The IUCN publishes information about endangered species world-wide as the
Red List of threatened species.
Vulnerable Species
This includes the species which are likely to be in danger of extinction in near future if the factors threatening to their extinction continue.
Survival of these species is not assured as their population has reduced greatly.
Rare Species
Population of these species is very small in the world; they are confined to limited areas or thinly scattered over a wider area.
CONSERVATION OF BIODIVERSITY
Biodiversity is important for human existence.
All forms of life are so closely interlinked that disturbance in one gives rise to imbalance in the others. If species of plants and animals become endangered, they cause degradation in the environment, which may threaten human being’s own existence.
Figure 14.2 : Red Panda — an endangered species
Reprint 2026-27
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY 118 (iv) Each country should identify habitats of wild relatives and ensure their protection.
(v) Habitats where species feed, breed, rest and nurse their young should be safeguarded and protected.
(vi) International trade in wild plants and animals be regulated.
To protect, preserve and propagate the variety of species within natural boundaries, the Government of India passed the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, under which national parks and sanctuaries were established and biosphere reserves declared. Details of these biosphere reserves are given in the book India:
Physical Environment (NCERT, 2006).
There are some countries which are situated in the tropical region; they possess a large number of the world’s species diversity.
They are called mega diversity centres. There are 12 such countries, namely Mexico,
Columbia, Ecuador, Peru, Brazil, Democratic
Republic of Congo, Madagascar, China, India,
Malaysia, Indonesia and Australia in which these centres are located. In order to concentrate resources on those areas that are most vulnerable, the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural
Resources (IUCN) has identified certain areas as biodiversity hotspots (Figure 14.1).
Hotspots are defined according to their vegetation. Plants are important because these determine the primary productivity of an ecosystem. Most, but not all, of the hotspots rely on species-rich ecosystems for food, firewood, cropland, and income from timber.
In Madagascar, for example, about 85 per cent of the plants and animals are found nowhere else in the world, Other hotspots in wealthy countries are facing different types of pressures. The islands of Hawaii have many unique plants and animals that are threatened by introduced species and land development.
There is an urgent need to educate people to adopt environment-friendly practices and reorient their activities in such a way that our development is harmonious with other life forms and is sustainable. There is an increasing consciousness of the fact that such conservation with sustainable use is possible only with the involvement and cooperation of local communities and individuals. For this, the development of institutional structures at local levels is necessary. The critical problem is not merely the conservation of species nor the habitat but the continuation of process of conservation.
The Government of India along with 155 other nations have signed the Convention of
Biodiversity at the Earth Summit held at
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil in June 1992. The world conservation strategy has suggested the following steps for biodiversity conservation:
(i) Efforts should be made to preserve the species that are endangered.
(ii) Prevention of extinction requires proper planning and management.
(iii) Varieties of food crops, forage plants, timber trees, livestock, animals and their wild relatives should be preserved;
Figure 14.3 : Humbodtia decurrens Bedd — highly rare endemic tree of Southern Western Ghats (India)
Reprint 2026-27
BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION 119
Figure 14.4 : Some ecological ‘hotspots’ in the world
EXERCISES
1. Multiple choice questions.
(i) Conservation of biodiversity is important for :
(a) Animals (c) Plants (b) Animals and plants (d) All organisms (ii) Threatened species are those which :
(a) threaten others (b) Lion and tiger (c) are abundant in number (d) are suffering from the danger of extinction (iii) National parks and sanctuaries are established for the purpose of :
(a) Recreation (c) Pets (b) Hunting (d) Conservation
Reprint 2026-27
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY 120 (iv) Biodiversity is richer in :
(a) Tropical Regions (c) Temperate Regions (b) Polar Regions (d) Oceans (v) In which one of the following countries, the ‘Earth Summit’ was held?
(a) the UK (c) Brazil (b) Mexico (d) China
2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) What is biodiversity?
(ii) What are the different levels of biodiversity?
(iii) What do you understand by ‘hotspots’?
(iv) Discuss briefly the importance of animals to human kind.
(v) What do you understand by ‘exotic species’?
3. Answer the following questions in about 150 words.
(i) What are the roles played by biodiversity in the shaping of nature?
(ii) What are the major factors that are responsible for the loss of biodiversity?
What steps are needed to prevent them?
Project Work
Collect the names of national parks, sanctuaries and biosphere reserves of the state where your school is located and show their location on the map of India.
Reprint 2026-27
Abiotic : Non-living thing. Usually refers to the physical and chemical components of an organism’s environment.
Adiabatic Lapse Rate : The rate of change of temperature by an ascending or descending airmass. If no other non-adiabatic processes (i.e. no heat enters or leaves the system) occur (like condensation, evaporation and radiation), expansion causes the parcel of air to cool at a set rate of 0.98° per 100 m. The opposite occurs when a parcel of air descends in the atmosphere. The air in a descending parcel becomes compressed. Compression causes the temperature within the parcel to increase at a rate of 0.98° per 100 m.
Air Mass : A body of air whose temperature and humidity characteristics, acquired in source region, remain relatively constant over a horizontal distance of hundreds to thousands of km. Air masses develop their climatic characteristics by remaining stationary over a source region for a number of days. Air masses are classified according to their temperature and humidity characteristics.
Aphelion : It is the point in the Earth’s orbit when it is farthest from the sun (152.5 million km). Aphelion occurs on the 3rd or 4th of July.
Asthenosphere : Zone in the Earth’s mantle that exhibits plastic properties. Located below the lithosphere at between 100 and 200 km.
Atmospheric Pressure : Weight of the atmosphere on a surface. At sea-level, the average atmospheric pressure is 1013.25 mb. Pressure is measured by a device called a barometer.
Aurora : Multicoloured lights that appear in the upper atmosphere (ionosphere)
over the polar regions and visible from locations in the middle and high latitudes.
Caused by the interaction of solar wind with oxygen and nitrogen gas in the atmosphere. Aurora in the Northern Hemisphere are called aurora borealis and aurora australis in the Southern Hemisphere.
Batholith : A large mass of subsurface intrusive igneous rock that has its origins from mantle magma.
Big Bang : Theory about the origin of universe. It suggests that about 15 billion years ago all of the matter and energy in the Universe was concentrated into an area smaller than an atom. At this instant, matter, energy, space and time were not existant. Then suddenly with a bang, the Universe began to expand at an incredible rate and matter, energy, space and time came into being. As the Universe expanded, matter began to coalesce into gas clouds, and then stars and planets.
Some scientists believe that this expansion is finite and will one day cease. After this point in time, the Universe will begin to collapse until a Big Crunch occurs.
Biodiversity : The diversity of different species (species diversity), genetic variability among individuals within each species (genetic diversity), and variety of ecosystems (ecosystem diversity).
Biomass : The weight of living tissues usually measured per unit area over a
GLOSSARY
Reprint 2026-27
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY 122 particular time interval. Can include the dead parts of organisms like bark, hair, and nails.
Biome : Largest recognisable assemblage of animals and plants on the Earth. The distribution of the biomes is controlled mainly by climate.
Calcification : A dry environment soil-forming process that results in the accumulation of calcium carbonate in surface soil layers.
Caldera Volcano : Explosive type of volcano that leaves a large circular depression.
Some of these depressions can be as large as 40 km in diameter. These volcanoes form when wet granitic magma quickly rises to the surface of the Earth.
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) : Is an artificially created gas that has become concentrated in the Earth’s atmosphere. This very strong greenhouse gas is released from aerosol sprays, refrigerants, and the production of fumes.
Cirrocumulus Clouds : Patchy white high altitude cloud composed of ice crystals.
Found in an altitude range from 5,000 - 18,000 m.
Cirrostratus Clouds : High altitude sheet like clouds composed of ice crystals.
These thin clouds often cover the entire sky. Found in an altitude range from
5,000 - 18,000 m.
Cold Front : A transition zone in the atmosphere where an advancing cold air mass displaces a warm air mass.
Continental Crust : Granitic portion of the Earth’s crust that makes up the continents. Thickness of the continental crust varies between 20 - 75 km. See sial
Coriolis Force : An apparent force due to the Earth’s rotation. Causes moving objects to be deflected to the right in the Northern Hemisphere and to the left in the Southern hemisphere. Coriolis force does not exist on the equator. This force is responsible for the direction of flow in meteorological phenomena like mid-latitude cyclones, hurricanes, and anticyclones.
Cumulus Cloud : Large clouds with relatively flat bases. These are found in an altitude range from 300 - 2,000 m.
Cumulonimbus Cloud : A well developed vertical cloud that often has top shaped like an anvil. These clouds can extend in altitude from a few hundred m above the surface to more than 12,000 m.
Desert Pavement : A veneer of coarse particles left on the ground after the erosion of finer particles by wind.
Earthquake : A sudden motion or shaking in the Earth. The motion is caused by the quick release of slowly accumulated energy in the form of seismic waves.
Earthquake Focus : Point of stress release in an earthquake (also known as hypocentre).
Ebb Tide : Time during the tidal period when the water level in the sea is falling.
Ecosystem : A system consisting of biotic and abiotic components. Both these groups are interrelated and interacting.
El Nino : The name given to the occasional development of warm ocean surface waters along the coast of Ecuador and Peru. Recently this phenomenon has been used for forecasting of climatic conditions in different parts of the world. The El Nino normally occurs around Christmas and lasts usually for a few weeks to a few months.
Reprint 2026-27
GLOSSARY 123
Epicentre : A place on the surface of the earth located at the shortest distance from the focus of the earthquake, the point at which the seismic energy gets released.
Global Warming : Warming of the Earth’s average global temperature because of an increase in the concentration of greenhouse gases.
Geomagnetism : A property of magnetically susceptible minerals to get aligned to the earth’s magnetic field during the period of rock formation.
Geostrophic Wind : Horizontal wind in the upper atmosphere that moves parallel to isobars. Results from a balance between pressure gradient force and Coriolis
Greenhouse Effect : The greenhouse effect causes the atmosphere to trap more heat energy at the Earth’s surface and within the atmosphere by absorbing and re-emitting longwave energy.
Greenhouse Gases : Gases responsible for the greenhouse effect. These gases include: carbon dioxide (CO2); methane (CH4); nitrous oxide (N2O); chlorofluorocarbons (CFC); and tropospheric ozone (O3).
Habitat : Location where a plant or animal lives.
Hail : It is a type of precipitation received in the form of ice pellets or hail stones.
The size of hailstones can be between 5 and 190 mm in diameter.
Halocline : The dinstinct zone in the ocean below which the salinity increases sharply.
Hydration : A form of chemical weathering that involves the rigid attachment of H+ and OH- ions to the atoms and molecules of a mineral.
Hydrolysis : Chemical weathering process that involves the reaction between mineral ions and the ions of water (OH- and H+), and results in the decomposition of the rock surface by forming new compounds.
Infiltration : A portion of the precipitation which reaches the earth surface seeps into the ground in the permeable strata. This process is known as infiltration.
Insolation : Incoming solar radiation in short wave form.
Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) : Zone of low atmospheric pressure and ascending air located at or near the equator. Rising air currents are due to global wind convergence and convection from thermal heating.
Katabatic Wind : Any wind blowing down the slope of a mountain.
Land Breeze : Local thermal circulation pattern found at the interface between land and water. In this circulation system, surface winds blow from land to water during the night.
La Nina : Condition opposite of an El Nino. In a La Nina, the tropical Pacific trade winds become very strong and an abnormal accumulation of cold water occurs in the central and eastern Pacific Ocean.
Latent Heat : It is the energy required to change a substance to a higher state of matter (solid > liquid > gas). This same energy is released from the substance when the change of state is reversed (gas > liquid > solid).
Neap Tide : Tide that occurs every 14 - 15 days and coincides with the first and last quarter of the moon. This tide has a small tidal range because the gravitational forces of the moon and sun are perpendicular to each other.
Reprint 2026-27
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY 124
Nimbostratus Clouds : Dark, gray low altitude cloud that produces continuous precipitation in the form of rain or snow. Found in an altitude range from the surface to 3,000 m.
Occluded Front : A transition zone in the atmosphere where an advancing cold air mass sandwiches a warm air mass between another cold air mass pushing the warm air into the upper atmosphere.
Ozone : Tri-atomic oxygen that exists in the earth’s atmosphere as a gas. Ozone is highest in concentration in the stratosphere (10-50 km above the earth’s surface)
where it absorbs the sun’s ultraviolet radiation. Stratospheric ozone is produced naturally and helps to protect life from the harmful effects of solar ultraviolet radiation.
Ozone Hole : It is a sharp seasonal decrease in stratospheric ozone concentration that occurs over Antarctica in the spring. First detected in the late 1970s, the ozone hole continues to appear as a result of complex chemical reaction in the atmosphere that involves CFCs.
Palaeomagnetism : The alignment in terms of inclination from horizon acquired by magnetically susceptible minerals in the rock during the period of their formation.
Photosynthesis : It is the chemical process where plants and some bacteria can capture and organically fi
