Poorvi —Grade 6 national war memorial
National War Memorial, New Delhi ¼jk"Vªh; lej Lekjd] ubZ fnYyh½ was established in February 2019. It is a national monument built by the Government of India in honour of our brave soldiers.
let us read
In Bharat’s heartland, a grand sight to behold,
The National War Memorial, honours brave stories retold.
With respect and grace, it stands with pride,
Each name etched, each stone, each story to confide.
From battle fields to skies, and to oceans wide,
They stand for Bharat, side by side.
The eternal flame, in silence it glows,
Paying homage to their courage that shows.
Their sacrifice, always in our mind,
In blessed memory, forever remind.
With pride and respect, let’s always remember,
At the National War Memorial, their sacrifice forever.
National War Memorial Amar Jawan Jyoti
Reprint 2026-27
Culture and tradition let us do these activities.
1. Read the poem aloud.
2. Recite the poem with your classmates and teacher.
3. Remember the poem.
let us explore
1. Visit the website of the National War Memorial and learn more about it.
https://www.mygov.in
2. Plan a visit to the National War Memorial with your teacher/parents.
Reprint 2026-27
Poorvi —Grade 6
Namaste! You must be tired and hungry after listening to so many people. I am Sushil from Jabalpur in Madhya Pradesh.
Let me tell you a unique dish of my district. It is called gakkad bharta. First, we make gakkad from wheat dough. Then, we make balls with that dough and roast them on high heat.
To make bharta, we roast brinjals and tomatoes. Then we garnish the bharta with chopped onions, coriander, green chillis and salt. This food item is made without frying. To eat it, you simply crumble the gakkad and drizzle it with some bharta and a spoonful of ghee. Come to Jabalpur and try it!
You will listen to the audio or narration once again. As you listen, check your answers.
KalaKritiyon Ka BHarat let us listen (refer to page 138)
transcript
Reprint 2026-27
Culture and tradition
Hello everyone! I’m happy to share with you some details about the Kite Festival. It is a popular festival in India and it takes place during Makar Sankranti in the month of January.
People can even be seen flying kites from their terraces and rooftops and taking part in kite flying competitions.
This festival is celebrated as Uttarayan in Western
India. The festival gives everyone a chance to look at kites of different shapes, sizes and colours. Gujarat is the main centre of celebrations but Uttarayan is also celebrated in Rajasthan and Telangana. In Karnataka, the Tourism
Department has also been organising the Kite Festival once each year. Punjab also celebrates this festival of kites during
Baisakhi and Basant Panchami.
Kite flying is a tradition that is deep-rooted in Indian culture and the Kite Festival is one that is eagerly awaited.
This is also a reason why people across India also fly kites to celebrate Independence Day. Happy kite-flying to all of you!
You will listen to the audio or narration once again. As you listen, check your answers.
tHe Kites let us listen (refer to page 148)
[Source: https://utsav.gov.in/view-event/kite-festival-2 (Ministry of Tourism)] transcript
Reprint 2026-27
Poorvi —Grade 6
Hello everyone! I’m here today to share some simple information about Kathiawar embroidery. This is a very old form of embroidery. It uses many bright colours and also uses many types of stitches, like the chain stitch. The embroidery is commonly seen on clothes and home decoration items.
On clothes, it is seen on children’s caps, ghagra skirts and men’s traditional shirts. In this embroidery, a lot of mirror work is done by fitting small mirrors along with the stitches.
Most commonly, the designs used are geometric shapes like squares and triangles. The design of flowers is also used.
There is much more to share but I’ll do that some other time.
Thank you!
You will listen to the audio or narration once again. As you listen, check your answers.
ila sacHani:
emBroidering dreams witH Her Feet let us listen (refer to page 158)
transcript
Reprint 2026-27
