4 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
1.1 INTRODUCTION
The primary objective of this book,
Indian Economic Development, is to familiarise you with the basic features of the Indian economy, and its development, as it is today, in the aftermath of Independence. However, it is equally important to know something about the country’s economic past even as you learn about its present state and future prospects. So, let us first look at the state of India’s economy prior to the country’s independence and form an idea of the various considerations that shaped India’s post-independence development strategy.
The structure of India’s present- day economy is not just of current making; it has its roots steeped in history, particularly in the period when
India was under British rule which lasted for almost two centuries before
India finally won its independence on
15 August 1947. The sole purpose of the British colonial rule in India was to reduce the country to being a raw material supplier for Great Britain’s own rapidly expanding modern industrial base. An understanding of the exploitative nature of this relationship is essential for any assessment of the kind and level of development which the Indian economy has been able to attain over the last seven and half decades. 1.2
1.2 LOW LEVEL OF ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT UNDER THE
COLONIAL RULE
India had an independent economy before the advent of the British rule.
Though agriculture was the main source of livelihood for most people, yet, the country’s economy was characterised by various kinds of manufacturing activities. India was particularly well known for its handicraft industries in the fields of cotton and silk textiles, metal and precious stone works etc. These products enjoyed a worldwide market based on the reputation of the fine quality of material used and the high standards of craftsmanship seen in all imports from India (See Box 1.1).
“India is the pivot of our Empire... If the Empire loses any other part of its
Dominion we can survive, but if we lose India, the sun of our Empire will have
Victor Alexander Vruce, the Viceroy of British India in 1894
Box 1.1: Textile Industry in Bengal
Muslin is a type of cotton textile which had its origin in Bengal, particularly, places in and around Dhaka (spelled during the pre-independence period as
Dacca), now the capital city of Bangladesh. ‘Daccai Muslin’ had gained worldwide fame as an exquisite type of cotton textile. The finest variety of muslin was called malmal. Sometimes, foreign travellers also used to refer to it as malmal shahi or malmal khas implying that it was worn by, or fit for, the royalty.
Reprint 2026-27
