7 INDIAN ECONOMY ON THE EVE OF INDEPENDENCE
But this could hardly help farmers in improving their economic condition as, instead of producing food crops, now they were producing cash crops which were to be ultimately used by
British industries back home. Despite some progress made in irrigation,
India’s agriculture was starved of investment in terracing, flood-control, drainage and desalinisation of soil.
While a small section of farmers changed their cropping pattern from food crops to commercial crops, a large section of tenants, small farmers and sharecroppers neither had resources and technology nor had incentive to invest in agriculure.
1.4 INDUSTRIAL SECTOR
As in the case of agriculture, so also in manufacturing, India could not develop a sound industrial base under the colonial rule. Even as the country’s world famous handicraft industries declined, no corresponding modern industrial base was allowed to come up to take pride of place so long enjoyed by the former. The primary motive of the colonial government behind this policy of systematically de- industrialising India was two-fold. The intention was, first, to reduce India to the status of a mere exporter of important raw materials for the upcoming modern industries in
Britain and, second, to turn India into a sprawling market for the finished products of those industries so that their continued expansion could be ensured to the maximum advantage of their home country — Britain. In the unfolding economic scenario, the decline of the indigenous handicraft industries created not only massive unemployment in India but also a new demand in the Indian consumer market, which was now deprived of the supply of locally made goods. This demand was profitably met by the increasing imports of cheap manufactured goods from Britain.
During the second half of the nineteenth century, modern industry began to take root in India but its p r o g r e s s r e m a i n e d v e r y s l o w .
Initially, this development was confined to the setting up of cotton and jute textile mills. The cotton textile mills, mainly dominated by
Indians, were located in the western p a r t s o f t h e c o u n t r y , n a m e l y ,
Maharashtra and Gujarat, while the jute mills dominated by the foreigners were mainly concentrated in Bengal. Subsequently, the iron and steel industries began coming up in the beginning of the twentieth century. The Tata Iron and Steel
Company (TISCO) was incorporated in 1907. A few other industries in the fields of sugar, cement, paper etc.
came up after the Second World War.
However, there was hardly any capital goods industry to help promote further industrialisation in
India. Capital goods industry means industries which can produce machine tools which are, in turn, used for producing articles for current consumption. The establishment of a few manufacturing units here and
Reprint 2026-27
