8 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT there was no substitute to the near wholesale displacement of the country’s traditional handicraft industries. Furthermore, the growth rate of the new industrial sector and its contribution to the Gross Domestic
Product (GDP) or Gross Value Added remained very small. Another significant drawback of the new industrial sector was the very limited area of operation of the public sector.
This sector remained confined only to the railways, power generation, communications, ports and some other departmental undertakings.
1.5 FOREIGN TRADE
India has been an important trading nation since ancient times. But the restrictive policies of commodity production, trade and tariff pursued by the colonial government adversely affected the structure, composition and volume of India’s foreign trade.
Consequently, India became an exporter of primary products such as raw silk, cotton, wool, sugar, indigo, jute etc. and an importer of finished consumer goods like cotton, silk and woollen clothes and capital goods like light machinery produced in the factories of Britain. For all practical purposes, Britain maintained a monopoly control over India’s exports and imports. As a result, more than half of India’s foreign trade was restricted to Britain while the rest was allowed with a few other countries like
China, Ceylon (Sri Lanka) and Persia (Iran). The opening of the Suez Canal further intensified British control over
India’s foreign trade (see Box 1.3).
The most important characteristic of India’s foreign trade throughout the colonial period was the generation of a large export surplus. But this surplus came at a huge cost to the country’s economy. Several essential commodities —food grains, clothes,
Work These Out
ÿ Prepare a list showing where and when other modern industries of India were first set up. Can you also find out what the basic requirements are for setting up any modern industry? What, for example, might have been the reasons for the setting up of the Tata Iron and Steel Company at Jamshedpur, which is now in the state of Jharkhand?
ÿ How many iron and steel factories are there in India at present? Are these iron and steel factories among the best in the world or do you think that these factories need restructuring and upgradation? If yes, how can this be done? There is an argument that industries which are not strategic in nature should not continue to be in the public sector. What is your view?
ÿ On a map of India, mark the cotton textiles, jute mills and textile mills that existed at the time of independence.
Reprint 2026-27
