11 INDIAN ECONOMY ON THE EVE OF INDEPENDENCE the largest share of workforce, which usually remained at a high of 70-75 per cent while the manufacturing and the services sectors accounted for only
10 and 15-20 per cent respectively.
Another striking aspect was the growing regional variation. Parts of the then Madras Presidency (comprising areas of the present-day states of Tamil Nadu, Andhra
Pradesh, Kerala and Karnataka),
Bombay and Bengal witnessed a decline in the dependence of the workforce on the agricultural sector with a commensurate increase in the manufacturing and the services sectors. However, there had been an increase in the share of workforce in agriculture during the same time in states such as Orissa, Rajasthan and
1.8 INFRASTRUCTURE
Under the colonial regime, basic infrastructure such as railways, ports, water transport, posts and telegraphs did develop. However, the real motive behind this development was not to provide basic amenities to the people but to subserve various colonial interests. Roads constructed in India prior to the advent of the
British rule were not fit for modern transport. The roads that were built primarily served the purposes of mobilising the army within India and drawing out raw materials from the countryside to the nearest railway station or the port to send these to far away England or other lucrative foreign destinations. There always remained an acute shortage of all- weather roads to reach out to the rural areas during the rainy season.
Naturally, therefore, people mostly living in these areas suffered grievously during natural calamities and famines.
The British introduced the railways in India in 1850 and it is considered as one of their most important contributions. The railways affected the structure of the
Indian economy in two important ways. On the one hand it enabled people to undertake long distance travel and thereby break geographical and cultural barriers while, on the other hand, it fostered commercialisation of Indian agriculture which adversely affected the self-sufficiency of the village economies in India. The volume of
India’s exports undoubtedly expanded but its benefits rarely accrued to the Indian people.
The social benefits, which the
Work These Out
ÿ Can you find out the reasons behind frequent occurrence of famines in
India before independence?
You may read from Nobel
Laureate Amartya Sen’s book, Poverty and Famines.
ÿ Prepare a pie chart for the occupational structure in India at the time of independence.
Reprint 2026-27
12 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Indian people gained owing to the introduction of the railways, were thus outweighed by the country’s huge economic loss.
Along with the development of roads and railways, the colonial dispensation also took measures for developing the inland trade and sea lanes. However, these measures were far from satisfactory. The inland waterways, at times, also proved uneconomical as in the case of the
Coast Canal on the Orissa coast.
Though the canal was built at a huge cost to the government exchequer, yet, it failed to compete with the railways, which soon traversed the region running parallel to the canal, and had to be ultimately abandoned. The introduction of the expensive system of electric telegraph in India, similarly, served the purpose of maintaining law and order. The postal services, on the other hand, despite serving a useful public purpose, remained all through inadequate.
Fig.1.5 Tata Airlines, a division of Tata and
Sons, was established in 1932 inaugurating the aviation sector in India
Fig. 1.4 First Railway Bridge linking Bombay with Thane, 1854
Work This Out
ÿ There is a perception still g o i n g a r o u n d t h a t i n m a n y ways the British administration in India was quite beneficial. This perception needs an i n f o r m e d d e b a t e . H o w w o u l d y o u l o o k a t t h i s p e r c e p t i o n ? A r g u e t h i s out in your class — ‘Was the British Raj good for
Reprint 2026-27
13 INDIAN ECONOMY ON THE EVE OF INDEPENDENCE
1.9 CONCLUSION
By the time India won its independence, the impact of the two-century long
British colonial rule was already showing on all aspects of the Indian economy. The agricultural sector was already saddled with surplus labour and extremely low productivity. The industrial sector was crying for modernisation, diversification, capacity building and increased public investment. Foreign trade was oriented to feed the Industrial Revolution in
Britain. Infrastructure facilities, including the famed railway network, needed upgradation, expansion and public orientation. Prevalence of rampant poverty and unemployment required welfare orientation of public economic policy. In a nutshell, the social and economic challenges before the country were enormous.
ÿ An understanding of the economy before independence is necessary to know and appreciate the level of development achieved during the post- independence period.
ÿ Under the colonial dispensation, the economic policies of the government were concerned more with the protection and promotion of British economic interests than with the need to develop the economic condition of the colonised country and its people.
ÿ The agricultural sector continued to experience stagnation and deterioration despite the fact that the largest section of Indian population depended on it for sustenance.
ÿ The rule of the British-India government led to the collapse of India’s world famous handicraft industries without contributing, in any significant manner, to its replacement by a modern industrial base.
ÿ Lack of adequate public health facilities, occurrence of frequent natural calamities and famines pauperised the hapless Indian people and resulted in engendering high mortality rates.
ÿ Some efforts were made by the colonial regime to improve infrastructure facilities but these efforts were spiced with selfish motives. However, the independent Indian government had to built on this base through planning.
Reprint 2026-27
14 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
1. What was the focus of the economic policies pursued by the colonial government in India? What were the impacts of these policies?
2. Name some notable economists who estimated India’s per capita income during the colonial period.
3. What were the main causes of India’s agricultural stagnation during the colonial period?
4. Name some modern industries which were in operation in our country at the time of independence.
5. What was the two-fold motive behind the systematic de- industrialisation effected by the British in pre-independent India?
6. The traditional handicrafts industries were ruined under the British rule. Do you agree with this view? Give reasons in support of your
7. What objectives did the British intend to achieve through their policies of infrastructure development in India?
8. Critically appraise some of the shortfalls of the industrial policy pursued by the British colonial administration.
9. What do you understand by the drain of Indian wealth during the colonial period?
10. Which is regarded as the defining year to mark the demographic transition from its first to the second decisive stage?
11. Give a quantitative appraisal of India’s demographic profile during the colonial period.
12. Highlight the salient features of India’s pre-independence occupational structure.
13. Underscore some of India’s most crucial economic challenges at the time of independence.
14. When was India’s first official census operation undertaken?
15. Indicate the volume and direction of trade at the time of independence.
16. Were there any positive contributions made by the British in India?
Discuss.
EXERCISES
Reprint 2026-27
15 INDIAN ECONOMY ON THE EVE OF INDEPENDENCE
SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES
REFERENCES
1. Prepare a list of goods and services that were available to people in pre-independence India in rural and urban areas. Compare it with the consumption pattern of such goods and services by the people today. Highlight the perceptible difference in the people’s standard of living.
2. Find pictures of towns/villages, in your vicinity, of the pre- independence period and compare these with their present scenario.
What changes can you mark? Are such changes for better or for worse? Discuss.
3. Rally around your teacher and organise a group discussion on ‘Has the zamindari system really been abolished in India’? If the consensus is negative, then what measures would you think should be taken to banish it and why?
4. Identify the major occupations followed by the people of our country at the time of independence. What major occupations do the people follow today? In the light of reform policies, how would you visualise the occupational scenario in India 15 years from now — say, 2035?
BADEN-POWELL, B.H. 1892. The Land Systems of British India, Vols I, II and
III. Oxford Clarendon Press, Oxford.
BUCHANAN, D.H. 1966. Development of Capitalist Enterprise in India. Frank
Cass and Co, London.
CHANDRA, BIPAN. 1993. ‘The Colonial Legacy’ in Bimal Jalan (Ed.), The Indian
Economy: Problems and Prospects. Penguin Books, New Delhi.
DUTT, R.C. 1963. Economic History of India, Vols I and II. Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting, Government of India, New Delhi.
KUMAR, D. AND MEGHNAD DESAI (Eds.). 1983. Cambridge Economic History of
India. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
MILL, JAMES.1972. History of British India. Associated Publishing House,
New Delhi.
PRASAD, RAJENDRA. 1946. India Divided. Hind Kitabs, Bombay.
SEN, AMARTYA. 1999. Poverty and Famines. Oxford University Press, New Delhi.
Government Reports
Economic Survey (for various years). Ministry of Finance, Government of India.
Reprint 2026-27
