After studying this chapter, the learners will
• come to know the goals of India’s five year plans
• know about the development policies in different sectors such as agriculture and industry from 1950-1990
• learn to think about the merits and limitations of a regulated economy.
INDIAN ECONOMY
1950–1990
Reprint 2026-27
17 INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990
2.1 INTRODUCTION
On 15 August 1947, India woke to a new dawn of freedom. Finally we were masters of our own destiny after some two hundred years of British rule; the job of nation building was now in our own hands. The leaders of independent India had to decide, among other things, the type of economic system most suitable for our nation, a system which would promote the welfare of all rather than a few. There are different types of economic systems (see Box 2.1) and among them, socialism appealed to
Jawaharlal Nehru the most. However, he was not in favour of the kind of socialism established in the former
Soviet Union where all the means of production, i.e. all the factories and farms in the country, were owned by the government. There was no private property. It is not possible in a d e m o c r a c y l i k e I n d i a f o r t h e government to change the ownership pattern of land and other properties of its citizens in the way that it was done in the former Soviet Union.
Nehru, and many other leaders and thinkers of the newly independent
India, sought an alternative to the extreme versions of capitalism and socialism. Basically sympathising with the socialist outlook, they found the answer in an economic system which, in their view, combined the best features of socialism without its drawbacks. In this view, India would be a socialist society with a strong public sector but also with private property and democracy; the government would plan (see Box 2.2) for the
The central objective of Planning in India... is to initiate a process of development which will raise the living standards and open out to the people new opportunities for a richer and more varied life.
First Five Year Plan
Work These Out
ÿ Prepare a chart on the different types of economic systems prevalent in the world. List out the countries as capitalist, socialist and mixed economy.
ÿ Plan a class trip to an agriculture farm. Divide the class into seven groups with each group to plan a specific goal, for example, the purpose of the visit, money expenditure involved, time taken, resources, people accompanying the group and who need to be contacted, possible places of visit, possible questions to be asked etc. Now, with the help of your teacher, compile these specific goals and compare with long-term goals of successful visit to an agricultural farm.
Reprint 2026-27
18 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Box 2.1: Types of Economic Systems
Every society has to answer three questions
ÿWhat goods and services should be produced in the country?
ÿHow should the goods and services be produced? Should producers use more human labour or more capital (machines) for producing things?
ÿHow should the goods and services be distributed among people?
One answer to these questions is to depend on the market forces of supply and demand. In a market economy, also called capitalism, only those consumer goods will be produced that are in demand, i.e., goods that can be sold profitably either in the domestic or in the foreign markets. If cars are in demand, cars will be produced and if bicycles are in demand, bicycles will be produced. If labour is cheaper than capital, more labour-intensive methods of production will be used and vice-versa. In a capitalist society the goods produced are distributed among people not on the basis of what people need but on the basis of Purchasing Power—the ability to buy goods and services. That is, one has to have the money in the pocket to buy it. Low cost housing for the poor is much needed but will not count as demand in the market sense because the poor do not have the purchasing power to back the demand. As a result this commodity will not be produced and supplied as per market forces. Such a society did not appeal to Jawaharlal
Nehru, our first prime minister, for it meant that the great majority of people of the country would be left behind without the chance to improve their quality of life.
A socialist society answers the three questions in a totally different manner. In a socialist society the government decides what goods are to be produced in accordance with the needs of society. It is assumed that the government knows what is good for the people of the country and so the desires of individual consumers are not given much importance. The government decides how goods are to be produced and how they should be distributed. In principle, distribution under socialism is supposed to be based on what people need and not on what they can afford to purchase. Unlike under capitalism, for example, a socialist nation provides free health care to all its citizens. Strictly, a socialist society has no private property since everything is owned by the state. In Cuba and China, for example, most of the economic activities are governed by the socialistic principles.
Most economies are mixed economies, i.e. the government and the market together answer the three questions of what to produce, how to produce and how to distribute what is produced. In a mixed economy, the market will provide whatever goods and services it can produce well, and the government will provide essential goods and services which the market fails to do.
Reprint 2026-27
