19 INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990 economy with the private sector being encouraged to be part of the plan effort.
The ‘Industrial Policy Resolution’ of
1948 and the Directive Principles of the Indian Constitution reflected this outlook. In 1950, the Planning
Commission was set up with the
Prime Minister as its Chairperson. The era of five year plans had begun.
2.2 THE GOALS OF FIVE YEAR PLANS
A plan should have some clearly specified goals. The goals of the five year plans were: growth, modernisation, self-reliance and equity. This does not mean that all the plans have given equal importance to all these goals.
Due to limited resources, a choice has to be made in each plan about which of the goals is to be given primary importance. Nevertheless, the planners have to ensure that, as far as possible, the policies of the plans do not contradict these four goals. Let us now learn about the goals of planning in some detail.
Growth: It refers to increase in the country’s capacity to produce the output of goods and services within the country. It implies either a larger stock of productive capital, o r a l a r g e r s i z e o f s u p p o r t i n g s e r v i c e s l i k e t r a n s p o r t a n d banking, or an increase in the efficiency of productive capital and s e r v i c e s . A g o o d i n d i c a t o r o f economic growth, in the language of
Box 2.2: What is a Plan?
A plan spells out how the resources of a nation should be put to use. It should have some general goals as well as specific objectives which are to be achieved within a specified period of time; in India plans were of five years duration and were called five year plans (we borrowed this from the former Soviet Union, the pioneer in national planning). Our plan documents upto the year 2017 not only specify the objectives to be attained in the five years of a plan but also what is to be achieved over a period of twenty years.
This long-term plan is called ‘perspective plan’. The five year plans were supposed to provide the basis for the perspective plan.
It will be unrealistic to expect all the goals of a plan to be given equal importance in all the plans. In fact the goals may actually be in conflict. For example, the goal of introducing modern technology may be in conflict with the goal of increasing employment if the technology reduces the need for labour. The planners have to balance the goals, a very difficult job indeed.
We find different goals being emphasised in different plans in India.
India’s five year plans did not spell out how much of each and every good and service is to be produced. This is neither possible nor necessary (the former Soviet Union tried to do this and failed). It is enough if the plan is specific about the sectors where it plays a commanding role, for instance, power generation and irrigation, while leaving the rest to the market.
Reprint 2026-27
20 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Box 2.3: Mahalanobis: the Architect of Indian Planning
Many distinguished thinkers contributed to the formulation of India’s five year plans. Among them, the name of the statistician, Prasanta Chandra
Mahalanobis, stands out.
Planning, in the real sense of the term, began with the Second Five Year
Plan. The Second Plan, a landmark contribution to development planning in general, laid down the basic ideas regarding goals of Indian planning; this plan was based on the ideas of Mahalanobis. In that sense, he can be regarded as the architect of Indian planning.
Mahalanobis was born in 1893 in Calcutta.
He was educated at the Presidency College in
Calcutta and at Cambridge University in
England. His contributions to the subject of statistics brought him international fame. In
1945 he was made a Fellow (member) of
Britain’s Royal Society, one of the most prestigious organisations of scientists; only the most outstanding scientists are made members of this Society.
Mahalanobis established the Indian
Statistical Institute (ISI) in Calcutta and started a journal, Sankhya, which still serves as a respected forum for statisticians to discuss their ideas. Both, the ISI and Sankhya, are highly regarded by statisticians and economists all over the world to this day.
During the second plan period, Mahalanobis invited many distinguished economists from India and abroad to advise him on India’s economic development. Some of these economists became Nobel Prize winners later, which shows that he could identify individuals with talent. Among the economists invited by Mahalanobis were those who were very critical of the socialist principles of the second plan. In other words, he was willing to listen to what his critics had to say, the mark of a great scholar.
Many economists today reject the approach to planning formulated by
Mahalanobis but he will always be remembered for playing a vital role in putting India on the road to economic progress, and statisticians continue to profit from his contribution to statistical theory.
Source: Sukhamoy Chakravarty, ‘Mahalanobis, Prasanta Chandra’ in John
Eatwell et.al, (Eds.) The New Palgrave Dictionary: Economic
Development, W.W. Norton, New York and London.
Reprint 2026-27
21 INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990 economics, is steady increase in the
Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The
GDP is the market value of all the final goods and services produced in the country during a year. You have studied this concept in Class X as well. You can think of the GDP as a cake and growth is increase in the size of the cake. If the cake is larger, more people can enjoy it. It is necessary to produce more goods and services if the people of India are to enjoy (in the words of the First Five
Year Plan) a more rich and varied life.
The GDP of a country is derived from the different sectors of the economy, namely the agricultural sector, the industrial sector and the service sector. The contribution made by each of these sectors makes up the structural composition of the economy. In some countries, growth in agriculture contributes more to the GDP growth, while in some countries the growth in the service sector contributes more to
GDP growth (see Box 2.4).
Modernisation: To increase the production of goods and services the producers have to adopt new technology. For example, a farmer can increase the output on the farm by using new seed varieties instead of using the old ones. Similarly, a factory can increase output by using a new type of machine. Adoption of new technology is called modernisation.
However, modernisation does not refer only to the use of new technology but also to changes in social outlook such as the recognition that women should have the same rights as men. In a traditional society, women are supposed to remain at home while men work. A modern society makes use of the talents of women in the work place
— in banks, factories, schools etc. — and such a society in most occassions is also prosperous.
Self-reliance: A nation can promote economic growth and modernisation by using its own resources or by using resources imported from other nations. The first seven five year plans gave importance to self-reliance which means avoiding imports of those goods which could be
Box 2.4: The Service Sector
As a country develops, it undergoes ‘structural change’. In the case of India, the structural change is peculiar. Usually, with development, the share of agriculture declines and the share of industry becomes dominant. At higher levels of development, the service sector contributes more to the GDP than the other two sectors. In India, the share of agriculture in the GDP was more than
50 per cent—as we would expect for a poor country. But by 1990 the share of the service sector was 40.59 per cent, more than that of agriculture or industry, like what we find in developed nations. This phenomenon of growing share of the service sector was accelerated in the post 1991 period (this marked the onset of globalisation in the country which will be discussed in chapter 3).
Reprint 2026-27
