27 INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990 a nation becomes more prosperous, the proportion of GDP contributed by agriculture as well as the proportion of population working in the sector declines considerably. In India, between 1950 and 1990, the proportion of GDP contributed by agriculture declined significantly but not the population depending on it (67.5 per cent in 1950 to 64.9 per cent by 1990). Why was such a large proportion of the population engaged in agriculture although agricultural output could have grown with much less people working in the sector? The answer is that the industrial sector and the service sector did not absorb the people working in the agricultural sector. Many economists call this an important failure of our policies followed during 1950-1990.
2.4 INDUSTRY AND TRADE
Economists have found that poor nations can progress only if they have a good industrial sector. Industry provides employment which is more stable than the employment in agriculture; it promotes modernisation and overall prosperity. It is for this reason that the five year plans placed a lot of emphasis on industrial d e v e l o p m e n t . Yo u m i g h t h a v e studied in the previous chapter that, at the time of independence, the variety of industries was very narrow
Box 2.6: Prices as Signals
You would have learnt in an earlier class about how prices of goods are determined in the market. It is important to understand that prices are signals about the availability of goods. If a good becomes scarce, its price will rise and those who use this good will have the incentive to make efficient decisions about its use based on the price. If the price of water goes up because of lower supply, people will have the incentive to use it with greater care; for example, they may stop watering the garden to conserve water. We complain whenever the price of petrol increases and blame it on the government. But the increase in petrol price reflects greater scarcity and the price rise is a signal that less petrol is available—this provides an incentive to use less petrol or look for alternate fuels.
Some economists point out that subsidies do not allow prices to indicate the supply of a good. When electricity and water are provided at a subsidised rate or free, they will be used wastefully without any concern for their scarcity.
Farmers will cultivate water intensive crops if water is supplied free, although the water resources in that region may be scarce and such crops will further deplete the already scarce resources. If water is priced to reflect scarcity, farmers will cultivate crops suitable to the region. Fertiliser and pesticide subsidies result in overuse of resources which can be harmful to the environment. Subsidies provide an incentive for wasteful use of resources.
Think about subsidies in terms of incentives and ask yourself whether it is wise from the economic viewpoint to provide free electricity to farmers.
Reprint 2026-27
28 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
— largely confined to cotton textiles and jute. There were two well- managed iron and steel firms — one in Jamshedpur and the other in
Kolkata — but, obviously, we needed to expand the industrial base with a variety of industries if the economy was to grow.
Public and Private Sectors in Indian
Industrial Development: The big question facing the policy makers was
— what should be the role of the government and the private sector in industrial development? At the time of independence, Indian industrialists did not have the capital to undertake
Work These Out
ÿ A group of students may visit an agricultural farm, prepare a case study on the method of farming used, that is, types of seeds, fertilisers, machines, means of irrigation, cost involved, marketable surplus and income earned.
It will be beneficial if the changes in cultivation methods could be collected from an elderly member of the farming family (a) Discuss the findings in your class.
(b) The different groups can then prepare a chart showing variations in cost of production, productivity, use of seeds, fertilisers, means of irrigation, time taken, marketable surplus and income of the family.
ÿ Collect newspaper cuttings related to the World Bank, International
Monetary Fund, World Trade Organisation (and meets of G7, G8, G10 countries). Discuss the views shared by the developed and developing countries on farm subsidies.
ÿ Prepare pie charts on the occupational structure of the Indian economy available in the following table. Discuss the possible reasons for the change in the shape of pies.
Sector 1950–51 1990–91
Agriculture 72.1 66.8
Industry 10.7 12.7
Services 17.2 20.5
ÿ Study the arguments for and against agricultural subsidies. What is your view on this issue?
ÿ Some economists argue that farmers in other countries, particularly developed countries, are provided with high amount of subsidies and are encouraged to export their produce to other countries. Do you think our farmers will be able to compete with farmers from developed countries?
Discuss.
Reprint 2026-27
29 INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990 investment in industrial ventures required for the development of Indian economy; nor was the market big enough to encourage industrialists to undertake major projects even if they had the capital to do so. It is principally for these reasons that the erstwhile governments had to play an extensive role in promoting the industrial sector.
In addition, the decision to develop the
Indian economy on socialist lines led to the policy of the government controlling the commanding heights of the economy, as the Second Five Year plan put it. This meant that the government would have complete control of those industries that were vital for the economy. The policies of the private sector would have to be complimentary to those of the public sector, with the public sector leading the way.
Industrial Policy Resolution 1956 (IPR 1956): In accordance with the goal of the state controlling the commanding heights of the economy, the Industrial Policy Resolution of
1956 was adopted. This resolution formed the basis of the Second Five
Year Plan, the plan which tried to build the basis for a socialist pattern of society. This resolution classified industries into three categories. The first category comprised industries which would be exclusively owned by the government; the second category consisted of industries in which the private sector could supplement the efforts of the public sector, with the government t a k i n g t h e s o l e responsibility for starting new units;
the third category consisted of the remaining industries which were to be in the private sector.
Although there was a category of industries left to the private sector, the sector was kept under state control through a system of licenses.
No new industry was allowed unless a license was obtained from the government. This policy was used for promoting industry in backward regions; it was easier to obtain a license if the industrial unit was established in an economically backward area. In addition, such units were given certain concessions such as tax benefits and electricity at a lower tariff. The purpose of this policy was to promote regional equality.
Even an existing industry had to obtain a license for expanding output or for diversifying production (producing a new variety of goods).
This was meant to ensure that the quantity of goods produced was not m o r e t h a n w h a t t h e e c o n o m y r e q u i r e d . L i c e n s e t o e x p a n d production was given only if the government was convinced that the economy required a larger quantity of goods.
Small-Scale Industry: In 1955, the
Village and Small-Scale Industries
Committee, also called the Karve
Committee, noted the possibility of using small-scale industries for promoting rural development. A
‘small-scale industry’ is defined with reference to the maximum invest- ment allowed on the assets of a unit.
This limit has changed over a period of time. In 1950 a small -scale industrial unit was one which invested
Reprint 2026-27
