41 LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL viz., liberalisation, privatisation and globalisation.
3.3 LIBERALISATION
As pointed out in the beginning, rules and laws which were aimed at regulating the economic activities became major hindrances in growth and development. Liberalisation was introduced to put an end to these restrictions and open various sectors o f t h e e c o n o m y . T h o u g h a f e w l i b e r a l i s a t i o n m e a s u r e s w e r e introduced in 1980s in areas of industrial licensing, export-import policy, technology upgradation, fiscal policy and foreign investment, reform policies initiated in 1991 were more comprehensive. Let us study some important areas, such as the industrial sector, financial sector, tax reforms, foreign exchange markets and trade and investment sectors which received greater attention in and after 1991.
Deregulation of Industrial Sector: In
India, regulatory mechanisms were enforced in various ways (i) industrial licensing under which every entrepreneur had to get permission from government officials to start a firm, close a firm or decide the amount of goods that could be produced (ii) private sector was not allowed in many industries (iii) some goods could be produced only in small-scale industries, and (iv) controls on price fixation and distribution of selected industrial products.
The reform policies introduced in and after 1991 removed many of t h e s e r e s t r i c t i o n s . I n d u s t r i a l licensing was abolished for almost all but product categories — alcohol, cigarettes, hazardous chemicals, industrial explosives, electronics, aerospace and drugs and pharma- ceuticals. The only industries which are now reserved for the public sector a r e a part of a t o m i c e n e r g y generation and some core activities in railway transport. Many goods produced by small-scale industries have now been dereserved. In most industries, the market has been allowed to determine the prices.
F i n a n c i a l S e c t o r R e f o r m s :
Financial sector includes financial institutions, such as commercial banks, investment banks, stock exchange operations and foreign exchange market. The financial sector in India is regulated by the
Reserve Bank of India (RBI). You may be aware that all banks and other financial institutions in India are regulated through various norms and regulations of the RBI. The RBI decides the amount of money that the banks can keep with themselves, fixes interest rates, nature of lending to various sectors, etc. One of the major aims of financial sector reforms is to reduce the role of RBI from regulator to facilitator of financial sector. This means that the financial s e c t o r m a y b e a l l o w e d t o t a k e decisions on many matters without consulting the RBI.
Reprint 2026-27
42 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
The reform policies led to the establishment of private sector banks,
Indian as well as foreign. Foreign investment limit in banks was raised to around 74 per cent. Those banks which fulfil certain conditions have been given freedom to set up new branches without the approval of the RBI and rationalise their existing branch networks. Though banks have been given permission to generate resources from India and abroad, certain managerial aspects have been retained with the RBI to safeguard the interests of the account-holders and the nation.
Foreign Institutional Investors (FII), such as merchant bankers, mutual funds and pension funds, are now allowed to invest in Indian financial markets.
Tax Reforms: Tax reforms are concerned with the reforms in the government’s taxation and public expenditure policies, which are collectively known as its fiscal policy.
There are two types of taxes: direct and indirect. Direct taxes consist of taxes on incomes of individuals, as well as, profits of business enterprises. Since
1991, there has been a continuous reduction in the taxes on individual incomes as it was felt that high rates of income tax were an important reason for tax evasion. It is now widely accepted that moderate rates of income tax encourage savings and voluntary disclosure of income. The rate of corporation tax, which was very high earlier, has been gradually reduced.
Efforts have also been made to reform the indirect taxes, taxes levied on goods and services to facilitate the establishment of a common national
In the year 2016, Indian constitution was amended to empower state governments and union Government to come out with laws to impose Goods and Services Tax. This has led to introduction of GST in India. This is expected to generate additional revenue for the government, reduce tax evasion and create ‘one nation, one tax and one market’. Another component of reform in this area is simplification. In order to encourage better compliance on the part of taxpayers, many procedures have been simplified and the rates also substantially lowered.
Foreign Exchange Reforms: The first important reform in the external sector was made in the foreign exchange market. In 1991, as an immediate measure to resolve the balance of payments crisis, the rupee was devalued against foreign currencies.
This led to an increase in the inflow of foreign exchange. It also set the tone to free the determination of rupee value in the foreign exchange market from government control. Now, more often than not, markets determine exchange rates based on the demand and supply of foreign exchange.
Trade and Investment Policy
Reforms: Liberalisation of trade and investment regime was initiated to increase international competitiveness of industrial production and also foreign investments and technology into the economy. The aim was also to promote the efficiency of local industries and adoption of modern technologies.
Reprint 2026-27
43 LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL
Work These Out
ÿ Give an example each of nationalised bank, private bank, private foreign bank, FII and a mutual fund.
ÿ Visit a bank in your locality with your parents. Observe and find out the functions it performs. Discuss the same with your classmates and prepare a chart on it.
ÿ Find out from your parents if they pay taxes. If yes, why do they do so and
ÿ Do you know that for a very long time countries used to keep silver and gold as reserves to make payments abroad? Find out in what form do we keep our foreign exchange reserves and find out from newspapers, magazines and the Economic Survey how much foreign exchange reserves India had during the last year. Also find the foreign currency of the following countries and its latest rupee exchange rate.
Country Currency Value of 1(one) unit of foreign currency in Indian rupee
Singapore
In order to protect domestic industries, India was following a regime of quantitative restrictions on imports. This was encouraged through tight control over imports and by keeping the tariffs very high. These policies reduced efficiency and competitiveness which led to slow growth of the manufacturing sector.
The trade policy reforms aimed at (i)
dismantling of quantitative restrictions on imports and exports (ii) reduction of tariff rates and (iii) removal of licensing procedures for imports.
Import licensing was abolished except in case of hazardous and environmentally sensitive industries.
Quantitative restrictions on imports of manufactured consumer goods and agricultural products were also fully removed from April 2001. Export duties have been removed to increase the competitive position of Indian goods in the international markets.
Reprint 2026-27
