45 LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL
The government envisaged that privatisation could provide strong impetus to the inflow of FDI.
The government has also made attempts to improve the efficiency of
PSUs by giving them autonomy in taking managerial decisions. For instance, some PSUs have been granted special status as maharatnas, navratnas and miniratnas (see
Box 3.1).
3.5 GLOBALISATION
Although globalisation is generally understood to mean integration of the economy of the country with the world economy, it is a complex phenomenon.
It is an outcome of the set of various policies that are aimed at transforming the world towards greater interdependence and integration. It involves creation of networks and activities transcending economic, social and geographical boundaries.
Globalisation attempts to establish links in such a way that the happenings in India can be influenced by events happening miles away. It is turning the world into one whole or creating a borderless world.
Outsourcing: This is one of the important outcomes of the globalisation process. In outsourcing, a company hires regular service from external sources, mostly from other countries, which was previously provided internally or from within the country (like legal advice, computer service, advertisement, security — each provided by respective departments of the company). As a form of economic activity, outsourcing has intensified, in recent times, because of the growth of fast modes of communication, particularly the growth of Information Technology (IT). Many of the services such as voice-based business processes (popularly known as BPO or call centres), record keeping,
Work These Out
ÿ Some scholars refer to disinvestment as the wave of privatisation spreading all over the world to improve the performance of public sector enterprises whereas others call it as outright sale of public property to the vested interests. What do you think?
ÿ Prepare a poster which contains 10-15 news clippings which you consider as important and relating to navaratnas, maharatnas, and miniratnas from newspapers. Also collect the logos and advertisements of these PSEs. Put these on the notice board and discuss them in the classroom.
ÿ Do you think only loss making companies should be privatised? Why?
ÿ Losses incurred by public sector enterprises are to be met out of the public budget. Do you agree with this statement? Discuss.
Reprint 2026-27
46 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT accountancy, banking services, music recording, film editing, book transcription, clinical advice or even teaching are being outsourced by companies in developed countries to
India. With the help of modern telecommunication links including the
Internet, the text, voice and visual data in respect of these services is digitised and transmitted in real time over continents and national boundaries.
Most multinational corporations, and even small companies, are outsourcing their services to India where they can be availed at a cheaper cost with reasonable degree of skill and accuracy. The low wage rates and availability of skilled manpower in
India have made it a destination for global outsourcing in the post-reform
World Trade Organisation (WTO):
The WTO was founded in 1995 as the successor organisation to the
General Agreement on Trade and
Tariff (GATT). GATT was established in 1948 with 23 countries as the
Box 3.2: Global Footprint!
Owing to globalisation, you might find many Indian companies have expanded their wings to many other countries. For example, ONGC Videsh, a subsidiary of the Indian public sector enterprise, Oil and Natural Gas Corporation engaged in oil and gas exploration and production has projects in 16 countries. Tata Steel, a private company established in 1907, is one of the top ten global steel companies in the world which have operations in 26 countries and sell its products in 50 countries. It employs nearly 50,000 persons in other countries. HCL Technologies, one of the top five IT companies in India has offices in 31 countries and employs about 15,000 persons abroad. Dr Reddy's Laboratories, initially was a small company supplying pharmaceutical goods to big Indian companies, today has manufacturing plants and research centres across the world.
Source: www.rediff.com accessed on 14.10.2014.
global trade organisation to administer all multilateral trade agreements by providing equal opportunities to all countries in the international market for trading purposes. WTO is expected to establish a rule-based trading regime in which nations cannot place arbitrary restrictions on trade. In addition, its purpose is also to enlarge Fig. 3.1 Outsourcing: a new employment opportunity in big cities
Reprint 2026-27
47 LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL production and trade of services, to ensure optimum utilisation of world resources and to protect the environment. The WTO agreements cover trade in goods as well as services to facilitate international trade (bilateral and multilateral) through removal of tariff as well as non-tariff barriers and providing greater market access to all member countries.
As an important member of WTO,
India has been in the forefront of framing fair global rules, regulations and safeguards and advocating the interests of the developing world.
India has kept its commitments towards liberalisation of trade, made in the WTO, by removing quantitative restrictions on imports and reducing tariff rates.
TABLE 3.1
Growth of GDP and Major Sectors (in %)
Sector 1980-91 1992-2001 2002-07 2007-12 2012-13 2013-14 2021-22
Agriculture 3.6 3.3 2.3 3.2 1.5 4.2 4.8*
Industry 7.1 6.5 9.4 7.4 3.6 5 12.7*
Services 6.7 8.2 7.8 10 8.1 7.8 9.2*
Total 5.6 6.4 7.8 8.2 5.6 6.6 9.4
Source: Economic Survey for various years, Ministry of Finance, Government of India.
Note: *Data pertaining to Gross Value Added (GVA). The GVA is estimated from GDP by adding subsidies on production and subtracting indirect taxes.
Work These Out
ÿ Many scholars argue that globalisation is a threat as it reduces the role of the government in many sectors. Some counter argue that it is an opportunity as it opens up markets to compete in and capture. Debate in the classroom.
ÿ Prepare a chart consisting of a list of five companies that have BPO services in India, along with their turnover.
ÿ Did you attend online classes or watched videos of your teachers or any other teacher taking classes during the last year through television, mobile phone or computers due to Covid 19 Pandemic? Share your experiences related to information technology.
ÿ Is employment in call centres sustainable? What kinds of skills should people working in call centres acquire to get a regular income?
ÿ If the multinational companies outsource many services to countries like
India because of cheap manpower, what will happen to people living in the countries where the companies are located? Discuss.
Reprint 2026-27
