48 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Some scholars question the usefulness of India being a member of the WTO as a major volume of international trade occurs among the developed nations. They also say that while developed countries file complaints over agricultural subsidies given in their countries, developing countries feel cheated as they are forced to open their markets for developed countries but are not allowed access to the markets of developed countries.
What do you think?
2021–22. During the reform period, the growth of agriculture has declined.
While the industrial sector reported fluctuation, the growth of the service sector has gone up. This indicates that
GDP growth is mainly driven by growth in the service sector. During
2012-13, there has been a setback in the growth rates of different sectors witnessed post–1991. While agriculture recorded a high growth rate during 2013–14, this sector witnessed small growth in 2021–22.
The service sector continued to witness a high level of growth — higher than the overall GDP growth during 2007–
22. The industrial sector witnessed a steep decline during 2012–13, in the subsequent years it began to show a continuous positive growth.
The opening of the economy has led to a rapid increase in foreign direct investment and foreign exchange reserves. The foreign investment, which includes foreign direct investment (FDI ) and for eign institutional investment (FII), has increased from about US $100 million in 1990–91 to US $ 23 billion in
2022–23. There has been an increase in the foreign exchange reserves from about US $ 6 billion in 1990-91 to about US $ 646 billion in 2023–24.
India is one of the largest foreign exchange reserve holders in the world.
Since 1991, India is seen as a successful exporter of auto parts, pharmaceutical goods, engineering goods, IT software and textiles. Rising prices have also been kept under control.
Fig. 3.2 IT industry is seen as a major contributor to India’s exports
3 . 6 I N D I A N E C O N O M Y D U R I N G
REFORMS: AN ASSESSMENT
The reform process has completed three decades since its introduction.
Let us now look at the performance of the Indian economy during this period. In economics, the growth of an economy is measured by the Gross
Domestic Product. Look at Table 3.1.
The post–1991 India witnessed a rapid growth in GDP on a continual basis for two decades. The growth of GDP increased from 5.6 per cent during 1980–91 to 9.4 per cent during
Reprint 2026-27
49 LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL
Work These Out
ÿ In the previous chapter, you might have studied about subsidies in various sectors, including agriculture. Some scholars argue that subsidy in agriculture should be removed to make the sector internationally competitive. Do you agree? If so, how can it be done? Discuss in class.
ÿ Read the following passage and discuss in class.
Groundnut is a major oilseed crop in Andhra Pradesh. Mahadeva, who was a farmer in Anantpur district of Andhra Pradesh, used to spend
Rs. 10,000 for growing groundnut on his plot of half an acre. The cost included expenditure on raw material (seeds, fertilisers, etc.), labour, bullock power and machinery used. On an average, Mahadeva used to get two quintals of groundnut, and each quintal was sold for Rs. 7,000.
Mahadeva, thus, was spending Rs. 10,000 and getting an income of Rs.
14,000. Anantpur district is a drought-prone area. As a result of economic reforms, the government did not undertake any major irrigation project.
Recently, groundnut crop in Anantpur is facing problems due to crop disease. Research and extension work has gone down due to lower government expenditure. Mahadeva and his friends brought this matter repeatedly to the notice of the government officials entrusted with this responsibility, but failed. Subsidy was reduced on material (seeds, fertilisers) which increased Mahadeva’s cost of cultivation. Moreover, the local markets were flooded with cheap imported edible oils, which was a result of removal of restriction on imports. Mahadeva was not able to sell his groundnut in the market as he was not getting the price to cover his cost.
What could be done to farmers like Mahadeva from incurring losses?
Discuss in the class.
The reform process has been widely criticised for not being able to address some of the basic problems facing our economy especially in areas of employment, agriculture, industry, infrastructure development and fiscal management. The evidences examined so far shown that it is not completely true. What do you think?
Growth and Employment: Though the GDP growth rate has increased in the reform period, scholars point out that the reform-led growth has not generated sufficient employment opportunities in the country. You will study the link between different aspects of employment and growth in the next unit.
Reprint 2026-27
50 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Reforms in Agriculture: Reforms have not been able to benefit agriculture, where the growth rate has been decelerating.
Since 1991, public investment in agriculture sector especially in infrastructure, which includes irrigation, power, roads, market linkages and research and extension (which played a crucial role in the
Green Revolution), has fallen. Further, the partial removal of fertiliser subsidy has led to increase in the cost of production, which has severely affected the small and marginal farmers. This sector has been experiencing a number of policy changes such as reduction in import duties on agricultural products, low minimum support price and lifting of quantitative restrictions on the imports of agricultural products. These have adversely affected Indian farmers as they now have to face increased international competition.
Moreover, because of export- oriented policy strategies in agriculture, there has been a shift from production for the domestic market towards production for the export market focusing on cash crops in lieu of production of food grains. This puts pressure on prices of food grains.
Reforms in Industry: Industrial growth has also recorded a slowdown.
This is because of decreasing demand of industrial products due to various reasons such as cheaper imports, inadequate investment in infrastructure etc. In a globalised world, developing countries are compelled to open up their economies to greater flow of goods and capital from developed countries and rendering their industries vulnerable to imported goods. Cheaper imports have, thus, replaced the demand for domestic goods. Domestic manufacturers are facing competition from imports. The infrastructure facilities, including power supply, have remained inadequate due to lack of investment. Globalisation is, thus, often seen as creating conditions for the free movement of goods and services from foreign countries that adversely affect the local industries and employment opportunities in developing countries.
Moreover, a developing country like India still does not have the access to developed countries’ markets because of high non-tariff barriers. For example, although all quota restrictions on exports of textiles and clothing have been removed in India,
USA has not removed their quota restriction on import of textiles from
India and China.
D isinvestment: Every year, the government fixes a target for disinvestment of PSEs. For instance, in 1991-92, it was targeted to mobilise Rs 2500 crore through disinvestment. The government was able to mobilise ` 3,040 crore more than the target. In 2022–23, government was able to mobilise about Rs. 46,000 crores. Critics
Reprint 2026-27
51 LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL point out that the assets of PSEs have been undervalued and sold to the private sector. This means that there has been a substantial loss to the government and the outright sale of public assets! Moreover, the proceeds from disinvestment are used to offset the shortage of government revenues rather than using it for the development of PSEs and building social infrastructure in the country.
Do you think selling a part of the properties of government companies is the best way to improve their efficiency?
Reforms and Fiscal Policies:
Economic reforms have placed limits on the growth of public expenditure, especially in social sectors. The tax reductions in the reform period, aimed at yielding larger revenue and curb tax evasion, have not resulted in increase in tax revenue for the government. Also,
Box 3.3: Siricilla Tragedy!
Power sector reforms in many Indian states led to do away with the supply of electricity at subsidised rates and steep rise in power tariff. This has affected workers engaged in small industries. Powerloom textile industry in Andhra
Pradesh is an example. Since the wages of the powerloom workers are linked to the production of cloth, power cut means cut in wages of weavers, who were already suffering from hike in tariff. A few years ago, this led to a crisis in the livelihood of the weavers and 50 powerloom workers committed suicide in a small town called ‘Siricilla’ in Andhra Pradesh.
ÿ Do you think the power tariff should not be raised?
ÿ What would be your suggestions to revive small industries affected by reforms?
the reform policies, involving tariff reduction, have curtailed the scope for raising revenue through custom duties.
In order to attract foreign investment, tax incentives are provided to foreign investors which further reduced the scope for raising tax revenues. This has a negative impact on developmental and welfare expenditures.
3.7 CONCLUSION
The process of globalisation through liberalisation and privatisation policies has produced positive, as well as, negative results both for India and other countries. Some scholars argue that globalisation should be seen as an opportunity in terms of greater access to global markets, high technology and increased possibility of large industries of developing countries to become important players in the international arena.
Reprint 2026-27
52 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
On the contrary, the critics argue that globalisation is a strategy of the developed countries to expand their markets in other countries. According to them, it has compromised the welfare and identity of people belonging to poor countries. It has further been pointed out that market- driven globalisation has widened the economic disparities among nations and people.
Viewed from the Indian context, some studies have stated that the crisis that erupted in the early 1990s was basically an outcome of the deep- rooted inequalities in Indian society and the economic reform policies initiated as a response to the crisis by the government, with externally advised policy package, further aggravated the inequalities. Further, it has increased the income and quality of consumption of only high- income groups and the growth has been concentrated only in some select areas in the services sector such as telecommunication, information technology, finance, entertainment, travel and hospitality services, real estate and trade, rather than vital sectors such as agriculture and industry which provide livelihoods to millions of people in the country.
ÿ The economy was facing problems of declining foreign exchange, growing imports without matching rise in exports and high inflation. India changed its economic policies in 1991 due to a financial crisis and pressure from international organisations like the World Bank and IMF.
ÿ In the domestic economy, major reforms were undertaken in the industrial and financial sectors. Major external sector reforms included foreign exchange deregulations and import liberalisation.
ÿ With a view to improving the performance of the public sector, there was a consensus on reducing its role and opening it up to the private sector. This was done through disinvestment and liberalisation measures.
ÿ Globalisation is the outcome of the policies of liberalisation and privatisation.
It means an integration of the economy of the country with the world economy.
ÿ Outsourcing is emerging as a major activity in industrial and service sectors.
ÿ The objective of the WTO is to establish a rule based trade regime to ensure optimum utilisation of world resources.
ÿ During the reforms, growth of agriculture and industry has gone down but the service sector has registered growth.
ÿ Reforms have not benefited the agriculture sector. There has also been a decline in public investment in this sector.
ÿ Industrial sector growth has slowed down due to availability of cheaper imports and lower investment.
Reprint 2026-27
53 LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL
1. Why were reforms introduced in India?
2. Why is it necessary to became a member of WTO?
3. Why did RBI have to change its role from controller to facilitator of financial sector in India?
4. How is RBI controlling the commercial banks?
5. What do you understand by devaluation of rupee?
6. Distinguish between the following (i) Strategic and Minority sale (ii) Bilateral and Multi-lateral trade (iii) Tariff and Non-tariff barriers.
7. Why are tariffs imposed?
8. What is the meaning of quantitative restrictions?
9. Those public sector undertakings which are making profits should be privatised. Do you agree with this view? Why?
10. Do you think outsourcing is good for India? Why are developed countries opposing it?
11. India has certain advantages which makes it a favourite outsourcing destination. What are these advantages?
12. Do you think the navaratna policy of the government helps in improving the performance of public sector undertakings in India?
13. What are the major factors responsible for the high growth of the service sector?
14. Agriculture sector appears to be adversely affected by the reform process. Why?
15. Why has the industrial sector performed poorly in the reform
16. Discuss economic reforms in India in the light of social justice and welfare.
EXERCISES
Reprint 2026-27
54 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
1. The table given below shows the GDP growth rate at 2011-12 prices. You have studied about the techniques of presentation of data in your Statistics for Economics course. Draw a time series line graph based on the data given in the table and interpret the same.
Year GDP Growth Rate (%)
2012-13 5.5
2013-14 6.4
2014-15 7.5
2015-16 8.0
2016-17 8.3
2017-18 6.8
2018-19 6.5
2019- 20 3.9
2020- 21 5.8
2021- 22 9.4
2. Observe around you — you will find State Electricity Boards (SEBs), BSES and many public and private organisations sup- plying electricity in different states and union territories. There are private buses on roads alongside the goverment bus services and (i) What do you think about this dual system of the co-existence of public and private sectors?
(ii) What are the merits and demerits of such a dual system?
Discuss.
3. With the help of your parents and grandparents prepare a list of multinational companies that existed in India at the time of independence. Now put a (¸) mark against those which are still growing and a (×) against those which do not exist any more. Are there any companies whose names have changed? Find out the new names, the country of origin, nature of product, logo and prepare charts and display in your class.
SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES
Reprint 2026-27
55 LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL
4. Give appropriate examples for the following:
Nature of Product Name of a Foreign Company
Biscuits
Computers
TV and Refrigerators
Stationery
Now, find out if these companies which are mentioned above existed in
India before 1991, or came after the New Economic Policy. For this, take the help of your teacher, parents, grandparents and shopkeepers.
5. Collect a few relevant newspaper cuttings and from the internet on meetings organised by WTO. Discuss the issues debated in these meetings, and find out how WTO facilitates world trade.
6. Was it necessary for India to introduce economic reforms at the behest of World Bank and International Monetary Fund? Was there no alternative for the government to solve the balance of pay- ments crisis? Discuss in the classroom.
ACHARYA, S. 2003. India’s Economy: Some Issues and Answers. Academic
Foundation, New Delhi.
ALTERNATIVE SURVEY GROUP. 2005. Alternative Economic Survey, India 2004–05,
Disequalising Growth. Daanish Books, Delhi.
AHLUWALIA, I.J. and I.M.D. LITTLE. 1998. India’s Economic Reforms and
Development. Oxford University Press, New Delhi.
BARDHAN, PRANAB. 1998. The Political Economy of Development in India.
Oxford University Press, Delhi.
BHADURI, AMIT and DEEPAK NAYYAR. 1996. The Intelligent Person’s Guide to
Liberalisation. Penguin, Delhi.
BHAGWATI, JAGDISH. 1992. India in Transition: Freeing the Economy. Oxford
University Press, Delhi.
REFERENCES
Reprint 2026-27
56 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
B Y R E S , T E R E N C E J . 1 9 9 7. T h e S t a t e , D e v e l o p m e n t P l a n n i n g a n d
Liberalisation in India. Oxford University Press, Delhi.
CHADHA, G.K. 1994. Policy Perspectives in Indian Economic Development.
Har-Anand, Delhi.
CHELLIAH, RAJA J. 1996. Towards Sustainable Growth: Essays in Fiscal and Financial Sector Reforms in India. Oxford University Press, New
DEBROY, B. and RAHUL MUKHERJI (Eds.). 2004. The Political Economy of
Reforms. Bookwell Publication, New Delhi.
DREZE, JEAN and AMARTYA SEN. 1996. India: Economic Development and
Social Opportunity. Oxford University Press, New Delhi.
DUTT, RUDDAR AND K.P.M. SUNDARAM. 2005. Indian Economy. S. Chand and
Company, New Delhi.
GUHA, ASHOK (Ed.) 1990. Economic Liberalisation, Industrial Structure and Growth in India. Oxford University Press, New Delhi.
JALAN, BIMAL. 1993. India’s Economic Crisis: The Way Ahead. Oxford
University Press, New Delhi.
JALAN, BIMAL. 1996. India’s Economic Policy: Preparing for the Twenty
First Century. Viking, Delhi.
JOSHI, VIJAY and I.M.D. LITTLE. 1996. India’s Economic Reforms 1991-2001.
Oxford University Press, New De
