60 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT technologies. Economists have stressed the need for expanding educational opportunities in a nation as it accelerates the development process.
4.2 WHAT IS HUMAN CAPITAL?
Just as a country can turn physical resources like land into physical capital like factories, similarly, it can also turn human resources like nurses, farmers, teachers, students into human capital like engineers and doctors. Societies need sufficient human capital in the first place — in the form of competent people who have themselves been educated and trained as professors and other professionals.
In other words, we need good human capital to produce other human capital (say, nurses, farmers, teachers, doctors, engineers...). This means that we need investment in human capital to produce more human capital out of human resources.
Let us understand a little more of what human capital means by posing the following questions :
(i) What are the sources of human capital?
(ii) Is there any relation between human capital and economic growth of a country?
(iii) Is the formation of human capital linked to people’s all-round development or, as it is now called, human development?
(iv) What role can the government play in human capital formation in India?
4.3 SOURCES OF HUMAN CAPITAL
Investment in education is considered as one of the main sources of human capital. There are several other sources as well. Investments in health, on- the- job training, migration and information are the other sources of human capital formation.
Why do your parents spend money on education? Spending on education by individuals is similar to spending on capital goods by companies with the objective of increasing future profits over a period of time. Likewise, individuals invest in education with the objective of increasing their future income.
Like education, health is also considered as an important input for the development of a nation as much as it is important for the development of an individual.
Who can work better — a sick person or a person with sound health?
A sick labourer without access to medical facilities is compelled to abstain from work and there is loss of productivity. Hence, expenditure on health is an important source of human capital formation.
Work This Out
ÿ Identify and collect the data from three families from different strata (i) very poor (ii) middle class and (iii)
affluent. Study the expenditure pattern of the families on education of male and female children.
Reprint 2026-27
