66 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT among the three largest economies in the world. This policy vision suggests how human capital formation in India will move its economy to a higher growth trajectory based on knowledge landscape.
4.4 HUMAN CAPITAL AND HUMAN
DEVELOPMENT
The two terms sound similar but there is a clear distinction between them.
Human capital considers education and health as a means to increase labour productivity. Human development is based on the idea that education and health are integral to human well-being because only when people have the ability to read and write and the ability to lead a long and healthy life, they will be able to make other choices which they value. Human capital treats human beings as a means to an end; the end being the increase in productivity. In this view, any investment in education and health is unproductive if it does not enhance output of goods and services. In the human development perspective, human beings are ends in themselves.
Human welfare should be increased through investments in education and health even if such investments do not result in higher labour productivity.
Therefore, basic education and basic health are important in themselves, irrespective of their contribution to labour productivity. In such a view, every individual has a right to get basic education and basic health care, that is, every individual has a right to be literate and lead a healthy life.
Box 4.2: India as a Knowledge Economy
The Indian software industry has been showing an impressive record over the past two decades. Entrepreneurs, bureaucrats and politicians are now advancing views about how India can transform itself into a knowledge-based economy by using information technology (IT). There have been some instances of villagers using e-mail which are cited as examples of such transformation. Likewise, e- governance is being projected as the way of the future. The value of IT depends greatly on the existing level of economic development. Do you think IT - based services in rural areas will lead to human development? Discuss.
Work This Out
ÿ If a construction worker, maid-servant, dhobi or a peon in school has absented herself/himself for long due to ill health, find out how it has affected her/his (i) job security (ii) wage/salary
What could be the possible reasons?
Reprint 2026-27
