67 HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA
4.5 S T A T E O F HU M A N CA P I T A L
FORMATION IN INDIA
In this section we are going to analyse human capital formation in India. We have already learnt that human capital formation is the outcome of investments in education, health, on-the-job training, migration and information. Of these education and health are very important sources of human capital formation. We know that India is a federal country with a union government, state governments and local governments (Municipal
Corporations, Municipalities and
Village Panchayats). The Constitution of India mentions the functions to be carried out by each level of government. Accordingly, expendi- tures on both education and health are to be carried out simultaneously by all the three tiers of the government.
Analysis of health sector is taken up in Chapter 8; hence, we will analyse only the education sector here.
Do you know who takes care of education and health in India? Before we take up the analysis of the education sector in India, we will look into the need for government intervention in education and health sectors. We do understand that education and health care services create both private and social benefits and this is the reason for the existence of both private and public institutions in the education and health service markets. Expenditures on education and health make substantial long-term impact and they cannot be easily reversed; hence, government intervention is essential. For instance, once a child is admitted to a school or health care centre where the required services are not provided, before the decision is taken to shift the child to another institution, substantial amount of damage would have been done. Moreover, individual consumers of these services do not have complete information about the quality of services and their costs. In this situation, the providers of education and health services acquire monopoly power and are involved in exploitation.
The role of government in this situation is to ensure that the private providers of these services adhere to the standards stipulated by the government and charge the correct price.
In India, the ministries of education at the union and state level, departments of education and various organisations like National Council of
Educational Research and Training (NCERT), University Grants Commission (UGC) and All India Council of
Technical Education (AICTE) facilitate institutions which come under the education sector. Similarly, the ministries of health at the union and state level, departments of health and various organisations like National
Medical Commission and Indian
Council for Medical Research (ICMR)
facilitate institutions which come under the health sector.
In a developing country like India, with a large section of the population living below the poverty line, many people cannot afford to access basic education and health care facilities.
Moreover, a substantial section of India’s population cannot afford
Reprint 2026-27
