68 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT to reach super specialty health care and higher education. Furthermore, when basic education and health care is considered as a right of the citizens, then it is essential that the government should provide education and health services free of cost for the deserving citizens and those from the socially oppressed classes. Both, the union and state governments, have been stepping up expenditures in the education sector over the years in order to fulfil the objective of attaining cent per cent literacy and considerably increase the average educational attainment of Indians.
the development of education in the country. During 1952-2020, education expenditure as percentage of total government expenditure increased from 7.92 to 16.54 and as percentage of GDP increased from
0.64 to 4.47. Throughout this period the increase in education expenditure has not been uniform and there has been irregular rise and fall. To this if we include the private expenditure incurred by individuals and by philanthropic institutions, the total education expenditure should be much higher.
Elementary education takes a major share of total education expenditure and the share of the higher/tertiary education (institutions of higher learning like colleges, polytechnics and universities) is the least. Though, on an average, the government spends less on tertiary education, ‘expenditure per student’ in tertiary education is higher than that of elementary. This does not mean that financial resources should be transferred from tertiary education to elementary education. As we expand school education, we need more teachers who are trained in the higher educational institutions; therefore, expenditure on all levels of education should be increased.
In 2020-21, the per capita public expenditure on elementary education differs considerably across states from as high as Rs 96,968 in Sikkim to as low as Rs 10,710 in Bihar. This leads to dif ferences in educational opportunities and attainments across
4.6 EDUCATION SECTOR IN INDIA
Growth in Government Expenditure on Education: Do you know how much the government spends on education? This expenditure by the government is expressed in two ways (i) as a percentage of ‘total government expenditure’ (ii) as a percentage of
Gross Domestic Product (GDP).
The percentage of ‘education expenditure of total government expenditure’ indicates the importance of education in the scheme of things before the government. The percentage of ‘education expenditure of GDP’ expresses how much of people’s income is being committed to
Work This Out
ÿ Identify the objectives and functions of NCERT, UGC,
AICTE and ICMR.
Reprint 2026-27
69 HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA
One can understand the inadequacy of the expenditure on education if we compare it with the desired level of education expenditure as recommended by the various commissions. The
Education Commission (1964–66) had recommended that at least 6 per cent of
GDP be spent on education so as to make a noticeable rate of growth in educational achievements. The Tapas
Majumdar Committee, appointed by the Government of India in 1999, estimated an expenditure of around Rs
1.37 lakh crore over 10 years (1998-
99 to 2006-07) to bring all
Indian children in the age group of 6-14 years under the purview of school education. Compared to this desired level of education expenditure of around 6 per cent of GDP, the current level of a little over 4 per cent has been quite inadequate. In principle, a goal of 6 per cent needs to be reached—this has been accepted as a must for the coming years. In 2009, the Government of India enacted the
Right of Children to Free and
Compulsory Education Act to make free education a fundamental right of all children in the age group of 6-14
Government of India has also started levying a 2 per cent ‘education cess’ on all Union taxes. The revenues from education cess has been earmarked for spending on elementary education. In addition to this, the government sanctions a large outlay for the promotion of higher education and
Fig. 4.5 Investment in educational infrastructure is inevitable
Work These Out
ÿ Prepare case studies of dropouts at different levels of schooling, say (i) Primary dropouts (ii) Class VIII dropouts (iii) Class X dropouts
Find out the causes and discuss in the class.
ÿ ‘School dropouts are giving way to child labour’. Discuss how this is a loss to human capital.
Reprint 2026-27
