70 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
TABLE 4.2
Educational Attainment in India
Sl.No. Particulars 1990 2000 2011 2017-18
1. Adult Literacy Rate (per cent of people aged 15+)
1.1 Male 61.9 68.4 79 82
1.2 Female 37.9 45.4 59 66
2. Primary completion rate (per cent of relevant age group)
2.1 Male 78 85 92 93
2.2 Female 61 69 94 96
3. Youth literacy rate (per cent of people aged 15+ to 24)
3.1 Male 76.6 79.7 90 93
3.2 Female 54.2 64.8 82 90 new loan schemes for students to pursue higher education.
Educational Achievements in
India: Generally, educational achievements in a country are indicated in terms of adult literacy level, primary education completion rate and youth literacy rate. These statistics for the last two decades are given above in
Table 4.2.
4.7 FUTURE PROSPECTS
Education for All — Still a Distant
Dream: Though literacy rates for both
— adults as well as youth — have increased, still the absolute number of illiterates in India is as much as
India’s population was at the time of independence. In 1950, when the
Constitution of India was passed by the
Constituent Assembly, it was noted in the Directive Principles of the
Fig. 4.6 School dropouts give way to child labour: a loss to human capital
Reprint 2026-27
71 HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA
Constitution that the government should provide free and compulsory education for all children up to the age of 14 years within 10 years from the commencement of the Constitution.
Had we achieved this, we would have cent per cent literacy by now.
Gender Equity — Better than Before:
The differences in literacy rates between males and females are narrowing signifying a positive development in gender equity; still the need to promote education for women in India is imminent for various reasons such as improving economic independence and social status of women and also because women education makes a favourable impact on fertility rate and health care of women and children.
Therefore, we cannot be complacent about the upward movement in the literacy rates and we have miles to go in achieving cent per cent adult literacy.
is the highest. As per NSSO data, in the year 2011-12, the rate of unemployment among youth males who studied graduation and above in rural areas was 19 per cent. Their urban counterparts had relatively less level of unemployment at 16 per cent. The most severely affected ones were young rural female graduates as nearly 30 per cent of them are unemployed. In contrast to this, only about 3-6 per cent of primary level educated youth in rural and urban areas were unemployed.
The situation has improved moderately as indicated by the Periodic Labour
Force Survey 2023-24. Nevertheless, the government should increase allocation for higher education and also improve the standard of higher education institutions, so that students are imparted employable skills in such institutions. When compared to less educated, a large proportion of educated persons are unemployed.
4.8 CONCLUSION
The economic and social benefits of human capital formation and human development are well known. The union and state governments in India have been earmarking substantial financial outlays for development of education and health sectors. The spread of education and health services across different sectors of society should be ensured so as to simultaneously attain economic growth and equity. India has a rich stock of scientific and technical manpower in the world. The need of the hour is to better it qualitatively and provide such conditions so that they are utilised in India.
Fig. 4.7 Higher Education: few takers
Higher Education — a Few Takers:
The Indian education pyramid is steep, indicating lesser and lesser number of people reaching the higher education level. Moreover, the level of unemployment among educated youth
Reprint 2026-27
72 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
1. What are the two major sources of human capital in a country?
2. What are the indicators of educational achievement in a country?
3. Why do we observe regional differences in educational attainment in India?
4. Bring out the differences between human capital and human development.
5. How is human development a broader term as compared to human capital?
6. What factors contribute to human capital formation?
ÿ Investments in education convert human beings into human capital; human capital represents enhanced labour productivity, which is an acquired ability and an outcome of deliberate investment decisions with an expectation that it will increase future income sources.
ÿ Investments in education, on-the-job training, health, migration and information are the sources of human capital formation.
ÿ The concept of physical capital is the base for conceptualising human capital.
There are some similarities as well as dissimilarities between the two forms of capital formation.
ÿ Investment in human capital formation is considered as efficient and growth enhancing.
ÿ Human development is based on the idea that education and health are integral to human well-being because only when people have the ability to read and write and the ability to lead a long and healthy life, will they be able to make other choices which they value.
ÿ The percentage of expenditure on education of the total government expenditure indicates the importance of education in the scheme of things for the government.
EXERCISES
Reprint 2026-27
73 HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA
7. How government organisations facilitate the functioning of schools and hospitals in India?
8. Education is considered to be an important input for the development of a nation. How?
9. Discuss the following as a source of human capital formation (i) Health infrastructure (ii) Expenditure on migration.
10. Establish the need for acquiring information relating to health and education expenditure for the effective utilisation of human resources.
11. How does investment in human capital contribute to growth?
12. ‘There is a downward trend in inequality world-wide with a rise in the average education levels’. Comment.
13. Examine the role of education in the economic development of a
14. Explain how investment in education stimulates economic growth.
15. Bring out the need for on-the-job-training for a person.
16. Trace the relationship between human capital and economic growth.
17. Discuss the need for promoting women’s education in India.
18. Argue in favour of the need for different forms of government intervention in education and health sectors.
19. What are the main problems of human capital formation in India?
20. In your view, is it essential for the government to regulate the fee structure in education and health care institutions? If so, why?
1. Identify how Human Development Index is calculated. What is the position of India in the World Human Development Index?
2. Is India going to be a knowledge based economy in the near future?
Discuss in the classroom.
3. Interpret the data given in Table 4.2.
4. As an educated person, what will be your contribution to the cause of education? (Example ‘Each one — teach one’).
SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES
Reprint 2026-27
74 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
5. Enlist the various sources that provide information regarding education, health and labour.
6. Read the annual reports of Union Ministries of Education and Health and Family welfare and make summaries. Read the chapter on social sector in the Economic Survey. These can be downloaded from websites of the respective Union Government Ministries.
BECKER, GARY S. 1964. Human Capital. 2nd Edition, Columbia University
Press, New York.
FREEM A N, RICH ARD. 1976. The Overeducated American. Academic Press,
New York.
SIDDH A RTH A N, N.S. A ND K. NA RAYA NA N (Eds.). 2013. Human Capital and
Development — The Indian Experience. Springer, New Delhi.
Government Reports
India Human Development Report 2011: Towards Social Inclusion, Plan- ning Commission, Government of India.
Educational Statistics At a glance, Ministry of Education (for various years),
Government of India.
Annual Reports, Ministry of Education, Government of India.
National Education Policy 2020, Ministry of Education, Govt. of India,
New Delhi.
ROSARIO, JYOTSNA AND K.R. SHANMUGAM. 2023. Impact of Transfers on Elementary
Education Expenditure and Measuring Equalisation Transfers to Indian
States. Working Paper 241/2023, Madras School Economics, Chennai.
Websites http://epathshala.nic.in www.education.nic.in www.cbse.nic.in www.ugc.ac.in www.aicte.ernet.in www.ncert.nic.in www.finmin.nic.in www.mospi.nic.in http://nroer.gov.in
REFERENCES
Reprint 2026-27
75 RURAL DEVELOPMENT
After studying this chapter, the learners will
• understand rural development and the major issues associated with it
• appreciate how crucial the development of rural areas is for India’s overall development
• understand the critical role of credit and marketing systems in rural development
• learn about the importance of diversification of productive activities to sustain livelihoods
• understand the significance of organic farming in sustainable development.
DEVELOPMENT
Reprint 2026-27
