77 RURAL DEVELOPMENT activities such as food processing.
Enabling them better and more affordable access to healthcare, sanitation facilities at workplaces and homes and education for all would also need to be given top priority for rapid rural development.
It was observed in an earlier chapter that although the share of agriculture sector’s contribution to GDP was on a decline, the population dependent on this sector did not show any significant decline. Further, after the initiation of reforms, the growth rate of agriculture sector decelerated to about
3 per cent per annum during the 1991-
2012, which was lower than the earlier years. In recent years, this sector has become volatile. During 2023-24, the
GVA growth rate of agriculture and its allied sectors was about two per cent.
Scholars identify decline in public investment since 1991 as the major reason for this. They also argue that inadequate infrastructure, lack of alternate employment opportunities in the industry or service sector, increasing casualisation of employment etc., further impede rural development.
The impact of this phenomenon can be seen from the growing distress witnessed among farmers across different parts of India. Against this background, we will critically look at some of the crucial aspects of rural
India like credit and marketing systems, agricultural diversification and the role of organic farming in promoting sustainable development.
5.3 CREDIT AND MARKETING IN RURA L
Credit: Growth of rural economy depends primarily on infusion of capital, from time to time, to realise higher productivity in agriculture and non-agriculture sectors. As the time of gestation period between crop sowing and realisation of income after production is quite long, farmers borrow from various sources to meet their initial investment on seeds, fertilisers, implements and other family expenses of marriage, death, religious ceremonies etc.
At the time of independence, moneylenders and traders exploited small and marginal farmers and landless labourers by lending to them on high interest rates and by manipulating the accounts to keep them in a debt-trap. A major change occurred after 1969 when India adopted social banking and multi- agency approach to adequately meet the needs of rural credit. Later, the
National Bank for Agriculture and
Work These Out
ÿ On a monthly basis, go through the newspapers of your region and identify the problems raised by them in relation to rural areas and the solutions offered. You could also visit a nearby village and identify the problems faced by people there.
Discuss this in the classroom.
ÿ Prepare a list of recent schemes and their objectives from the government website https:// www.rural.nic.in. Collect the details of how anyone of these schemes implemented in your region/rural neighbourhood areas. Discuss your observations in class.
Reprint 2026-27
78 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Box 5.1: The Poor Women’s Bank
‘Kudumbashree’ is a women-oriented community-based poverty reduction programme being implemented in Kerala. In 1995, a thrift and credit society was started as a small savings bank for poor women with the objective to encourage savings. The thrift and credit society mobilised Rs 1 crore as thrift savings. These societies have been acclaimed as the largest informal banks in
Asia in terms of participation and savings mobilised.
Source: www.kudumbashree.org. Visit this website and explore various other initiatives undertaken by this organisation. Identify some factors which contributed to their successes and discuss in the class.
National Bank for Agriculture and
Rural Development (NABARD) was set up in 1982 as an apex body to coordinate the activities of all institutions involved in the rural financing system. The Green
Revolution was a harbinger of major changes in the credit system as it led to the diversification of the portfolio of rural credit towards production- oriented lending.
The institutional structure of rural banking today consists of a set of multi-agency institutions, namely, commercial banks, regional rural banks (RRBs), cooperatives and land development banks. They are expected to dispense adequate credit at cheaper rates. Recently, Self-Help Groups (henceforth SHGs) have emerged to fill the gap in the formal credit system because the formal credit delivery mechanism has not only proven inadequate but has also not been fully integrated into the overall rural social and community development. Since some kind of collateral is required, vast proportion of poor rural households were automatically out of the credit network. The SHGs promote thrift in small proportions by a minimum contribution from each member. From the pooled money, credit is given to the needy members to be repayable in small instalments at reasonable interest rates. By May 2019, nearly 6 crore
Work These Out
ÿ In your locality/neighbourhood, you might notice self-help groups providing credit. Attend few meetings of such self-help groups. Write a report on the profile of a self-help group. The profile may include — when it was started, the number of members, amount of savings and type of credit they provide and how borrowers use the loan.
ÿ You might also find that those who take a loan for starting self-employment activities but use it for other purposes. Interact with few such borrowers.
Identify the reasons for not starting self employment activities and discuss in the classroom.
Reprint 2026-27
79 RURAL DEVELOPMENT women in India have become member in 54 lakh women SHGs. In recent years, about ` 10-15,000 per SHG and another `2.5 lakhs per SHG as a
Community Investment Support Fund (CISF) are provided as part of renovating fund to take up self employement for income generation. Such credit provisions are generally referred to as micro-credit programmes. SHGs have helped in the empowerment of women. It is alleged that the borrowings are mainly confined to consumption purposes. Why are borrowers not spending for productive purposes?
Rural Banking — a Critical
Appraisal: Rapid expansion of the banking system had a positive effect on rural farm and non-farm output, income and employment, especially after the green revolution — it helped farmers to avail services and credit facilities and a variety of loans for meeting their prodution needs.
Famines became events of the past;
we have now achieved food security which is reflected in the abundant buffer stocks of grains. However, all is not well with our banking system.
With the possible exception of the commercial banks, other formal institutions have failed to develop a culture of deposit mobilisation — lending to worthwhile borrowers and effective loan recovery. Agriculture loan default rates have been chronically high. Why farmers failed to pay back loans? It is alleged that farmers are deliberately refusing to pay back loans.
What could be the reasons?
Thus, the expansion and promotion of the rural banking sector has taken a backseat after reforms. To improve the situation, In recent years, all the adults are encouraged to open bank accounts as a part of a scheme known as Jan-
Dhan Yojana. Those bank account holders can get Rs. 1-2 lakh accidental insurance coverage and overdraft facilities for Rs. 10,000 and get their wages if they get any government-related jobs and works under MNREGA (now known as Viksit Bharat – Guarantee for
Rozgar and Ajeevika Mission [Gramin]
[VB-G RAM G]); old age pension and
Work These Out
ÿ In the last few years, you might have taken note — in your neighbourhood if you are living in rural areas or read in the newspapers or seen on TV — of farmers commiting suicides. Many such farmers had borrowed money for farming and other purposes. It was found that when they were unable to pay back due to crop failure, insufficient income and employment opportunities, they took such steps. Collect information relating to such cases and discuss in the classroom.
ÿ Visit banks that cater to rural areas. They may be primary agricultural cooperative banks, land development banks, regional rural banks or district cooperative banks.
Collect details such as how many rural households borrowed from them, amount generally borrowed, kinds of collateral used, interest rates and dues.
ÿ If farmers who borrowed from cooperative banks could not pay back due to crop failure and other reasons, their loans should be waived otherwise they may take drastic decisions like committing suicides. Do you agree?
Reprint 2026-27
