82 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT them to cultivate farm products (vegetables, fruits, etc.) of the desired quality by providing them with not only seeds and other inputs but also assured procurement of the produce at pre- decided prices. It is argued that such arrangements will help in reducing the price risks of farmers and would also expand the markets for farm products.
Do you think such arrangements raise incomes of small farmers.
greater risk in depending exclusively on farming for livelihood.
Diversification towards new areas is necessary not only to reduce the risk from agriculture sector but also to provide productive sustainable livelihood options to rural people.
Much of the agricultural employment activities are concentrated in the
Kharif season. But during the Rabi season, in areas where there are inadequate irrigation facilities, it becomes difficult to find gainful employment. Therefore expansion into other sectors is essential to provide supplementary gainful employment and in realising higher levels of income for rural people to overcome poverty and other tribulations. Hence, there is a need to focus on allied activities, non-farm employment and other emerging alternatives of livelihood, though there are many other options available for providing sustainable livelihoods in rural areas.
In 2020, Indian Parliament passed three laws to reform agriculture marketing system. While some section of farmers support these reforms, the rest of the farmers oppose and these
Acts were later repealed. Collect the details of these laws, debate and discuss in the class.
5.5 DIVERSIFICATION INTO PRODUCTIVE
ACTIVITIES
Diversification includes two aspects - one relates to change in cropping pattern and the other relates to a shift of workforce from agriculture to other allied activities (livestock, poultry, fisheries etc.) and non-agriculture sector. The need for diversification arises from the fact that there is Fig. 5.2 Jaggery making is an allied activity of the farming sector
Work This Out
ÿVisit one such alternative marketing system which farmers in your locality, or in the neighbourhood rural areas, use. How are they different from regulated market yards? Should they be encouraged and supported by the government?
Why and how? Discuss.
Reprint 2026-27
83 RURAL DEVELOPMENT
As agriculture is already overcrowded, a major proportion of the increasing labour force needs to find alternate employment opportunities in other non-farm sectors. Non-farm economy has several segments in it;
some possess dynamic linkages that permit healthy growth while others are in subsistence, low productivity propositions. The dynamic sub-sectors include agro-processing industries, food processing industries, leather industry, tourism, etc. Those sectors which have the potential but seriously lack infrastructure and other support include traditional home-based industries like pottery, crafts, handlooms etc.
Majority of rural women find employment in agriculture while men generally look for non-farm employment. In recent times, women have also begun looking for non-farm jobs (see Box 5.2).
Animal Husbandry: In India, the farming community uses the mixed crop-livestock farming system —cattle, goats, fowl are the widely held species. Livestock production provides increased stability in income, food security, transport, fuel and nutrition for the family without disrupting other food-producing activities. Today, livestock sector alone provides alternate livelihood options to over 70 million small and marginal farmers including landless labourers. A significant number of women also find employment in the livestock sector.
Chart 5.1 shows the distribution of livestock in India. Poultry accounts for the largest share with 61 per cent
Box 5.2: Tamil Nadu Women in Agriculture (TANWA)
Tamil Nadu Women in Agriculture (TANWA) was a project initiated in the late 1980s in Tamil Nadu to train women in latest agricultural techniques and in organic farming.
It encouraged women to actively participate in raising agricultural productivity and family income. At a Farm Women’s Group in Thiruchirapalli, run by Anthoniammal, trained women are successfully making and selling vermicompost and earning money from this venture. Many other Farm Women’s Groups are creating savings in their group by functioning like mini banks through a micro-credit system. With the accumulated savings, they promote small-scale household activities like mushroom cultivation, soap manufacture, doll making or other income-generating activities.
There could be similar initiatives in your area or your neighborhood rural areas.
Talk to organisation or women entrepreneurs and discuss the details in the class.
Chart 5.1: Distribution of Poultry and
Livestock in India, 2019
Reprint 2026-27
84 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT followed by others. Other animals which include camels, asses, horses, ponies and mules are in the lowest rung. India had about 303 million cattle, including
110 million buffaloes in 2019.
Performance of the Indian dairy sector over the last three decades has been quite impressive. Milk production in the country has increased by about twelve times between 1951-2021. This can be attributed mainly to the successful implementation of
‘Operation Flood’. It is a system whereby all the farmers can pool their milk produced according to different grading (based on quality), processed and marketed to urban centres through cooperatives. In this system the farmers are assured of a fair price and income from the supply of milk to urban markets. As pointed out earlier
Gujarat state is held as a success story in the efficient implementation of milk cooperatives which has been emulated by many states. Gujarat, Madhya
Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab and
Rajasthan, are major milk producing states. Meat, eggs, wool and other by- products are also emerging as important productive sectors for diversification.
Fisheries: Fisheries: Fisheries: Fisheries: Fisheries: The fishing community regards the water body as ‘mother’ or
‘provider’. The water bodies consisting of sea, oceans, rivers, lakes, natural aquatic ponds, streams etc. are, therefore, an integral and life-giving source for the fishing community. In
India, after progressive increase in budgetary allocations and introduction of new technologies in fisheries and aquaculture, the development of fisheries has come a long way.
Presently, fish production from inland sources contributes about 75 per cent to the total value of fish production and the balance 25 per cent comes from the marine sector (sea and oceans). Today total fish production accounts for about 1.5 per cent of the total GDP. In
India, West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh,
Kerala, Gujarat, Maharashtra and
Tamil Nadu are major fish producing states. A large share of fishworker families are poor. Rampant underemployment, low per capita earnings, absence of mobility of labour to other sectors and a high rate of illiteracy and indebtedness are some of the major problems fishing community face today. Even though women are not involved in active fishing, about 60 per cent of the workforce in export marketing and 40 per cent in internal marketing are women. There is a need to increase credit facilities through cooperatives and SHGs for
Fig. 5.3 Fig. 5.3 Fig. 5.3 Fig. 5.3 Fig. 5.3 Sheep rearing — an important income augmenting activity in rural areas
Reprint 2026-27
85 RURAL DEVELOPMENT fisherwomen to meet the working capital requirements for marketing.
Horticulture: Blessed with a varying climate and soil conditions, India has adopted growing of diverse horti- cultural crops such as fruits, vegetables, tuber crops, flowers, medicinal and aromatic plants, spices and plantation crops. These crops play a vital role in providing food and nutrition, besides addressing employment concerns. Horticulture sector contributes nearly one-third of the value of agriculture output and six per cent of Gross Domestic Product of India. India has emerged as a world leader in producing a variety of fruits like mangoes, bananas, coconuts, cashew nuts and a number of spices and is the second largest producer of fruits and vegetables. Economic condition of many farmers engaged in horticulture has improved and it has become a means of improving livelihood for many unprivileged classes. Flower harvesting, nursery maintenance, hybrid seed production and tissue culture, propagation of fruits and flowers and food processing are highly remunerative employment options for women in rural areas.
Though, in terms of numbers, our livestock population is quite impressive but its productivity is quite low as compared to other countries. It requires improved technology and promotion of good breeds of animals to enhance productivity. Improved veterinary care and credit facilities to small and marginal farmers and landless labourers would enhance sustainable livelihood options through livestock production.
Production of fisheries has already increased substantially.
However problems related to over- fishing and pollution need to be regulated
Fig. 5.5 Women in rural households take up bee- keeping as an entrepreneurial activity
Fig. 5.4 Poultry has the largest share of total livestock in India
Reprint 2026-27
