86 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT and controlled. Welfare programmes for the fishing community have to be reoriented in a manner which can provide long-term gains and sustenance of livelihoods. Horticulture has emerged as a successful sustainable livelihood option and needs to be encouraged significantly. Enhancing its role requires investment in infrastructure like electricity, cold storage systems, marketing linkages, small-scale processing units and technology improvement and dissemination.
Other Alternate Livelihood Options:
The IT has revolutionised many sectors in the Indian economy. There is broad consensus that IT can play a critical role in achieving sustainable development and food security in the twenty-first century. Governments can predict areas of food insecurity and vulnerability using appropriate information and software tools so that action can be taken to prevent or reduce the likelihood of an emergency.
It also has a positive impact on the agriculture sector as it can disseminate information regarding emerging technologies and its applications, prices, weather and soil conditions for growing different crops etc. Though
IT is, by itself, no catalyst of change but it can act as a tool for releasing the creative potential and knowledge embedded in the society. It also has potential of employment generation in rural areas. Experiments with IT and its application to rural development are carried out in different parts of India.
5.6 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT AND
ORGANIC FARMING
In recent years, awareness of the harmful effect of chemical-based fertilisers and pesticides on our health is on a rise. Conventional agriculture relies heavily on chemical fertilisers and toxic pesticides etc., which enter the food supply, penetrate the water sources, harm the livestock, deplete the soil and devastate natural eco-systems.
Efforts in evolving technologies which are eco-friendly are essential for sustainable development and one such technology which is eco-friendly is organic farming. In short, organic agriculture is a whole system of
Box 5.3: Adoption of Village by Parliamentarians
In October, 2014, The Government of India introduced a new scheme called
Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY). Under this scheme, Members of India's
Parliament need to identify and develop one village from their constituencies. To begin with, MPs can develop one village as a model village by 2016, and two more by 2019, covering over 2,500 villages in India. According to the scheme, the village can have a population of 3,000-5,000 in the plains and 1,000-3,000 in the hills and should not be MPs' own or their spouse's village. MPs are expected to facilitate a village development plan, motivate villagers to take up activities and built infrastructure in the areas of health, nutrition and education.
Source: www.pib.nic.in accessed on 24 October 2014.
Reprint 2026-27
87 RURAL DEVELOPMENT farming that restores, maintains and enhances the ecological balance. There is an increasing demand for organically grown food to enhance food safety throughout the world (see
Box 5.4).
Benefits of Organic Farming:
Organic agriculture offers a means to substitute costlier agricultural inputs (such as HYV seeds, chemical fertilisers, pesticides etc.) with locally produced organic inputs that are cheaper and thereby generate good returns on investment. Organic agriculture also generates income through exports as the demand for organically grown crops is on a rise. Studies across countries have shown that organically grown food has more nutritional value than chemical farming thus providing us with healthy foods. Since organic farming requires more labour input than conventional farming, India will find organic farming an attractive proposition. Finally, the produce is pesticide-free and produced in an environmentally sustainable way (see
Box 5.5).
Popularising organic farming requires awareness and willingness on the part of farmers to adapt to new technology. Inadequate infrastructure and the problem of marketing the products are major concerns which need to be addressed apart from an
Box 5.5: Organically Produced Cotton in Maharashtra
In 1995, when Kisan Mehta of Prakruti (an NGO) first suggested that cotton, the biggest user of chemical pesticides, could be grown organically, the then
Director of the Central Institute for Cotton Research, Nagpur, famously remarked,
“Do you want India to go naked?” At present, as many as 130 farmers have committed 1,200 hectares of land to grow cotton organically on the International
Federation of Organic Agriculture Movement’s standards. The produce was later tested by the German Accredited Agency, AGRECO, and found to be of high quality. Kisan Mehta feels that about 78 per cent of Indian farmers are marginal farmers owning about less than 0.8 hectare but accounting for 20 per cent of India’s cultivable land. For such farmers, organic agriculture is more profitable in terms of money and soil conservation in the long run. Visit a farm in your locality which uses organic manure and discuss the uses associated with the farming practices. Present the report in your class.
Source: Lyla Bavadam, A Green Alternative, Frontline, 29 July 2005.
Box 5.4: Organic Food
Organic food is growing in popularity across the world. Many countries have around 10 per cent of their food system under organic farming. There are many retail chains and supermarkets which are accorded with green status to sell organic food. Moreover, organic foods command higher price of around 10-100 per cent than conventional ones.
Reprint 2026-27
88 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT appropriate agriculture policy to promote organic farming. It has been observed that the yields from organic farming are less than modern agricultural farming in the initial years.
Therefore, small and marginal farmers may find it difficult to adapt to large- scale production. Organic produce may also have more blemishes and a shorter shelf life than sprayed produce.
Moreover choice in production of off-season crops is quite limited in organic farming. Nevertheless, organic farming helps in sustainable development of agriculture and India has a clear advantage in producing organic products for both domestic and international markets. Do you think food and non-food items cultivated using organic farming methods will be cheaper?
5.7 CONCLUSION
It is clear that until and unless some spectacular changes occur, the rural sector might continue to remain backward. There is a greater need today to make rural areas more vibrant through diversification into d a i r y i n g , p o u l t r y , f i s h e r i e s , vegetables and fruits and linking up the rural production centres with the urban and foreign (export) markets to realise higher returns on the i n v e s t m e n t s f o r t h e p r o d u c t s .
Moreover, infrastructure elements like credit and marketing, farmer- friendly agricultural policies and a constant appraisal and dialogue between farmers’ groups and state a g r i c u l t u r a l d e p a r t m e n t s a r e essential to realise the full potential of the sector.
Today we cannot look at the environment and rural development as two distinct subjects. There is need to invent or procure alternate sets of eco- friendly technologies that lead to sustainable development in different circumstances. From these, each rural
Work These Out
ÿ Make a list of five popular items that are organically produced in India.
ÿ Visit a nearby super market, vegetable shop and/or a departmental shop.
Identify a few products. Prepare a chart comparing a few goods that are produced organically and in the normal way on the basis of their prices, shelf life, quality and the kind of advertisement through which they are popularised.
ÿ Visit a horticultural farm in the nearby locality. Collect the details of goods that they cultivate on the farm. They could have diversified their cropping patterns. Discuss with them the merits and demerits of the diversification.
Reprint 2026-27
89 RURAL DEVELOPMENT community can choose whatever will suit its purpose. We need to learn from, and also try out when found relevant, practices from the available set of ‘best practice’ illustrations (which means success stories of rural development experiments that have already been carried out in similar conditions in different parts of India), to speed up this process of ‘learning by doing’.
1. What do you mean by rural development? Bring out the key issues in rural development.
2. Discuss the importance of credit in rural development.
3. Explain the role of micro-credit in meeting credit requirements of the
4. Explain the steps taken by the government in developing rural markets.
5. Why is agricultural diversification essential for sustainable livelihoods?
6. Critically evaluate the role of the rural banking system in the process of rural development in India.
ÿ Rural development is quite a comprehensive term but it essentially means a plan of action for the development of rural areas which are lagging behind in socio-economic development.
ÿ There is a need for improving the quantity and quality of infrastructure in rural areas such as banking, marketing, storage, transport and communications etc. to realise its true potential.
ÿ Diversification towards new areas such as livestock, fisheries and other non-agricultural activities is necessary not only to reduce the risk from agriculture sector but also to provide productive sustainable livelihood options to our rural people.
ÿ The importance of organic farming as an environmentally sustainable production process is on a rise and needs to be promoted.
EXERCISES
Reprint 2026-27
90 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
7. What do you mean by agricultural marketing?
8. Mention some obstacles that hinder the mechanism of agricultural marketing.
9. What are the alternative channels available for agricultural marketing? Give some examples.
10. Distinguish between ‘Green Revolution’ and ‘Golden Revolution’.
11. Do you think various measures taken by the government to improve agricultural marketing are sufficient? Discuss.
12. Explain the role of non-farm employment in promoting rural diversification.
13. Bring out the importance of animal husbandry, fisheries and horticulture as a source of diversification.
14. ‘Information technology plays a very significant role in achieving sustainable development and food security’ — comment.
15. What is organic farming and how does it promote sustainable development?
16. Identify the benefits and limitations of organic farming.
17. Enlist some problems faced by farmers during the initial years of organic farming.
18. “Jan-Dhan-Yojna helps in the rural development.” Do you agree with this statement? Explain.
ACHARYA, S.S. 2004. Agricultural Marketing, State of the Indian Farmer, a
Millennium Study. Academic Foundation, New Delhi.
ALAGH, Y.K. 2004. State of the Indian Farmer, a Millennium Study — an Overview.
Academic Foundation, New Delhi.
CHAWLA, N.K., M.P.G. KURUP and V. P. SHARMA. 2004. Animal Husbandry, State of the Indian Farmer, a Millennium Study. Academic Foundation, New Delhi.
DEHADRAI, P.V. and Y.S. YADAV. 2004. Fisheries Development, State of the Indian
Farmer, a Millennium Study. Academic Foundation, New Delhi.
JALAN, BIMAL. (Ed.). 1992. The Indian Economy: Problems and Perspectives.
Penguin Publication, New Delhi.
REFERENCES
Reprint 2026-27
91 RURAL DEVELOPMENT
NARAYANAN, S. 2005. Organic Farming in India. NABARD Occasional Paper No:
38, Department of Agriculture and Rural Development, Mumbai.
SINGH, H.P., P.P. DUTTA and M. SUDHA. 2004. Horticulture Development, State of the Indian Farmer, a Millennium Study. Academic Foundation, New Delhi.
SINGH, SURJIT and VIDYA SAGAR. 2004. Agricultural Credit in India: State of the
Indian Farmer, a Millennium Study. Academic Foundation, New Delhi.
SINHA, V.K. 1998. Challenges in Rural Development. Discovery Publishing
House, New Delhi.
TODARO, MICHAEL P. 1987. Economic Development in the Third World. Orient
Longman Ltd, Hyderabad.
TOPPO, E. 2004. Organic Vegetable Gardening: Grow Your Own Vegetables. Unit for Labour Studies, Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai.
Government Reports
Successful Governance Initiatives and Best Practices: Experiences from Indian
States, Government of India in Coordination with Human Resource
Development Centre and UNDP, Planning Commission, Delhi, 2002.
Annual Reports, Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India, New
Basic Animal Husbandry and Fisheries Statistics ( for various years), Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare, Government of India.
Websites www.dahd.nic.in www.saanjhi.gov.in www.ruralindiaonline.org
Reprint 2026-27
9 2 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
After studying this chapter, the learners will
• understand a few basic concepts relating to employment such as economic activity, worker, workforce and unemployment
• understand the nature of participation of men and women in various economic activities in various sectors
• know the nature and extent of unemployment
• assess the initiatives taken by the government in generating employment opportunities in various sectors and regions.
EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH,
INFORMALISATION
AND OTHER ISSUES
Reprint 2026-27
9 3 EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES
6.1 INTRODUCTION
People do a variety of work. Some work on farms, in factories, banks, shops and many other workplaces; yet a few others work at home. Work at home includes not only traditional work like weaving, lace making or variety of handicrafts but also modern jobs like programming work in the IT industry. Earlier factory work meant working in factories located in cities whereas now technology has enabled people to produce those factory-based goods at home in villages. During Covid-19 pandemic in 2020–21, millions of workers delivered their products and services through work-from-home.
Why do people work? Work plays an important role in our lives as individuals and as members of society.
People work for ‘earning’ a living. Some people get, or have, money by inheriting it, not working for it. This does not completely satisfy anybody. Being employed in work gives us a sense of self-worth and enables us to relate ourselves meaningfully with others.
Every working person is actively contributing to national income and hence, the development of the country by engaging in various economic activities — that is the real meaning of
‘earning’ a living. We do not work only for ourselves; we also have a sense of accomplishment when we work to meet the requirements of those who are dependent on us. Having recognised the importance of work, Mahatma
Gandhi insisted upon education and training through a variety of works including craft.
Studying about working people gives us insights into the quality and nature of employment in a country and helps in understanding and planning our human resources. It helps us to analyse the contribution made by different industries and sectors towards national income. It also helps us to address many social issues such as exploitation of marginalised sections of the society, child labour, etc.
What I object to, is the ‘craze’ for machinery, not machinery as such. The craze is for what they call labour-saving machinery. Men go on ‘saving labour’ till thousands are without work and thrown on the open streets to die of starvation...
Mahatma Gandhi
Fig. 6.1 Multinational companies sell footballs made in the houses of Jalandhar, Punjab
Reprint 2026-27
