9 5 EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES rural workers constitute about two- thirds of this 471 million. Men form the majority of workforce in India.
About 77 per cent of the workers are men and the rest are women (men and women include child labourers in respective sexes). Women workers account for one-fourth of the rural workforce whereas in urban areas, they are just one-fifth of the workforce. Women carry out works like cooking, fetching water and fuelwood and participate in farm labour. They are not paid wages in cash or in the form of grains; at times they are not paid at all. For this reason, these women are not categorised as workers. Economists argue that these women should also be called workers. What do you think?
6.3 PARTICIPATION OF PEOPLE IN
EMPLOYMENT
Worker-population ratio is an indicator which is used for analysing the employment situation in the country.
This ratio is useful in knowing the proportion of population that is actively contributing to the production of goods and services of a country. If the ratio is higher, it means that the engagement of people is greater; if the ratio for a country is medium, or low, it means that a very high proportion of its population is not involved directly in economic activities.
You might have already studied, in lower classes, the meaning of the term ‘population’. Population is defined as the total number of people who reside in a particular locality at a particular point of time. If you want to know the worker-population ratio for India, divide the total number of workers in India by the population in
India and multiply it by 100, you will get the worker-population ratio for
If you look at Table 6.1, it shows the different levels of participation of people in economic activities. For every 100 persons, about 41 (by rounding off 41.1) are workers in
India. In urban areas, the proportion is about 38, whereas in rural India, the ratio is about 42. Why is there such a difference? People in rural areas have limited resources to earn a higher income and participate more in the employment market. Many do not go to schools, colleges and other training institutions. Even if some go, they discontinue in the middle to join the workforce; whereas, in urban areas, a considerable section is able to study in various educational institutions. Urban people have a variety of employment opportunities. They look for the appropriate job to suit their qualifications and skills. In rural areas, people cannot stay at home as their economic condition may not allow them to do so.
TABLE 6.1
Worker-Population Ratio in India,
Sex Worker-Population Ratio
Total Rural Urban
Men 56.4 56.3 56.4
Women 30.7 34.8 20.7
Total 43.7 45.6 38.9
Reprint 2026-27
