103 EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES
6.7 IN F O R M A L I S A T I O N O F IN D I A N
WORKFORCE
In the previous section we have found that the proportion of hired work jobs - working for others has been increasing.
One of the objectives of development planning in India, since India’s independence, has been to provide decent livelihood to its people. It has been envisaged that the industrialisation strategy would bring surplus workers from agriculture to industry with better standard of living as in developed countries. We have seen in the preceding section, that even after 70 years of planned development, more than half of the Indian workforce depends on farming as the major source of livelihood.
Economists argue that, over the years, the quality of employment has been deteriorating. Even after working for more than 10-20 years, why do some workers not get maternity benefit, provident fund, gratuity and pension?
Why does a person working in the private sector get a lower salary as compared to another person doing the same work but in the public sector?
You may find that a small section of
Indian workforce is getting regular income. The government, through its labour laws, enable them to protect their rights in various ways. This section of the workforce forms trade unions, bargains with employers for better wages and other social security measures. Who are they?
To know this we classify workforce into two categories: workers in formal and informal sectors, which are also referred to as organised and unorganised sectors. All the public sector establishments and those private sector establishments which employ
10 hired workers or more are called formal sector establishments and those who work in such establishments are formal sector workers. All other enterprises and workers working in those enterprises form the informal sector.
Thus, informal sector includes millions of farmers, agricultural labourers, owners of small enterprises and people working in those enterprises as also the self-employed who do not have any hired workers. It also includes all non- farm casual wage labourers who work for more than one employer such as construction workers and headload workers. You may note that this is one of the ways of classifying workers.
There could be other ways of classification as well. Discuss the possible ways in the class.
Box 6.1: Formal Sector Employment
The information relating to employment in the formal sector is collected by the Union
Ministry of Labour through employment exchanges located in different parts of the country.
Do you know who is the major employer in the formal sector in India? In 2012, out of about 30 million formal sector workers, about 18 million workers were employed by the public sector. Here also men form the majority, as women constitute only about one-sixth of the formal sector workforce. Economists point out that the reform process initiated in the early 1990s resulted in a decline in the number of workers employed in the formal sector. What do you think?
Reprint 2026-27
104 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Those who are working in the formal sector enjoy social security benefits.
They earn more than those in the informal sector. Developmental planning envisaged that as the economy grows, more and more workers would become formal sector workers and the proportion of workers engaged in the informal sector would dwindle. But what has happened in India? Look at the following chart which gives the distribution of workforce in formal and informal sectors.
In 2019–20 there were about 535 million workers in India. There were about
59 million workers in the formal sector (Chart 6.4). Can you estimate the percentage of people employed in the informal sectors in the country? About only 11 per cent (59/535×100)! Thus, the rest 89 per cent are in the informal sector. In
2011–12, the year for which gender wise data on formal-informal sector employment is available about 20 per cent of formal sector and 30 per cent of informal sector workers were women.
FFFFFig. 6.4 ig. 6.4 ig. 6.4 ig. 6.4 ig. 6.4 Road side vending: an increasing variety of informal sector employment
Chart 6.4: Workers in Formal and Informal
Sector, 2011–2020 (in crores)
Formal Informal
Reprint 2026-27
105 EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES
Box 6.2: Informalisation in Ahmedabad
Ahmedabad is a prosperous city with its wealth based on the produce of more than 60 textile mills with a labour force of 1,50,000 workers employed in them.
These workers had, over the course of the century, acquired a certain degree of income security. They had secure jobs with a living wage; they were covered by social security schemes protecting their health and old age. They had a strong trade union which not only represented them in disputes but also ran activities for the welfare of workers and their families.
In the early 1980s, textile mills all over the country began to close down. In some places, such as Mumbai, the mills closed rapidly. In
Ahmedabad, the process of closure was long drawn out and spread over 10 years.
Over this period, approximately over 80,000 permanent workers and over 50,000 non-permanent workers lost their jobs and were driven to the informal sector.
The city experienced an economic recession and public disturbances, especially communal riots. A whole class of workers was thrown back from the middle class into the informal sector, into poverty. There was widespread alcoholism and suicides, children were withdrawn from school and sent to work.
Source: Renana Jhabvala, Ratna M. Sudarshan and Jeemol Unni (Ed.) Informal
Economy at Centre Stage: New Structures of Employment, Sage
Publications, New Delhi, 2003, pp.265.
Since the late 1970s, many developing countries, including India, started paying attention to enterprises and workers in the informal sector as employment in the formal sector is not gr owing. Workers and enterprises in the informal sector do not get regular income; they do not have any protection or regulation from the government. Workers are dismissed without any compensation.
Technology used in the informal sector enterprises is outdated; they also do not maintain any accounts. Workers of this sector live in slums and are squatters. Of late, owing to the efforts of the International Labour Organisation (ILO), the Indian government has
Change in the balance of power in a house: an unemployed mill worker peeling garlic whereas his wife has a new job of beedi rolling.
Reprint 2026-27
