106 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT initiated the modernisation of informal sector enterprises and provision of social security measures to informal sector workers.
6.8 UNEMPLOYMENT
You might have seen people looking for jobs in newspapers. Some look for a job through friends and relatives. In many cities, you might find people standing in some select areas looking for people to employ them for that day’s work. Some go to factories and offices and give their bio-data and ask whether there is any vacancy in their factory or office.
Many in the rural areas do not go out and ask for a job but stay home when there is no work. Some go to
Work These Out
Tick (¸) mark against those which are in the informal sector
ÿ Worker in a hotel which has seven hired workers and three family workers
ÿ A private school teacher in a school which has 25 teachers
ÿ A police constable
ÿ Nurse in a government hospital
ÿ Cycle-rickshaw puller
ÿ The owner of a textile shop employing nine workers
ÿ Driver of a bus company which has more than 10 buses with 20 drivers, conductors and other workers
ÿ Civil engineer working in a construction company which has 10 workers
ÿ Computer operator in the state government office working on a temporary
ÿ A clerk in the electricity office.
Fig. 6.5 Unemployed mill workers waiting for casual jobs
Reprint 2026-27
107 EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES employment exchanges and register themselves for vacancies notified through employment exchanges. The National
Statistical Office (Previously it was known as National Sample Survey Organisation)
defines unemployment as a situation in which all those who, owing to lack of work, are not working but either seek work through employment exchanges, intermediaries, friends or relatives or by making applications to prospective employers or express their willingness or availability for work under the prevailing condition of work and remunerations. There are a variety of ways by which an unemployed person is identified. Economists define unemployed person as one who is not able to get employment of even one hour in half a day.
There are three sources of data on unemployment : Reports of Census of
India, National Statistical Office’s
Reports of Employment and
Unemployment Situation, Annual
Reports of Periodic Labour Force
Survey, and Directorate General of
Employment and Training data of Registration with
Employment Exchanges.
Though they provide different estimates of unemployment, they do provide us with the attributes of the unemployed and the variety of unemployment prevailing in our country.
Do we have different types of unemployment in our economy? The situation described in the first paragraph of this section is called open unemployment. Economists call unemployment prevailing in Indian farms as disguised unemployment. What is disguised unemployment? Suppose a farmer has four acres of land and he actually needs only two workers and himself to carry out various operations on his farm in a year, but if he employs five workers and his family members such as his wife and children, this situation is known as disguised unemployment. One study conducted in the late 1950s showed about one-third of agriculture workers in India as disguisedly unemployed.
You may have noticed that many people migrate to an urban area, pick up a job and stay there for some time, but come back to their home villages as soon as the rainy season begins.
Why do they do so? This is because work in agriculture is seasonal; there are no employment opportunities in the village for all months in the year. When there is no work to do on farms, people go to urban areas and look for jobs.
Fig. 6.6 Sugar cane cutters: disguised unemployment is common in farm works
Reprint 2026-27
