108 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
This kind of unemployment is known as seasonal unemployment. This is also a common form of unemployment prevailing in India.
Though we have witnessed slow growth of employment, have you seen people being unemployed over a very long time? Scholars say that in India, people cannot remain completely unemployed for very long because their desperate economic condition would not allow them to be so. You will rather find them being forced to accept jobs that nobody else would do, unpleasant or even dangerous jobs in unclean, or unhealthy surroundings.
The Central and State governments take initiatives and generate employment to facilitate a decent living for low income families through various measures. These will be discussed in the following section.
6.9 GOVERNMENT AND
EMPLOYMENT GENERATION
You may recall about the Mahatma Gandhi National
Rural Employment Guarantee
Act 2005. It promises 100 days of guaranteed wage employment to all rural households who volunteer to do unskilled manual work. The scheme based on this Act is one of the many measures the government has implemented to generate employment for those who are in need of jobs in rural areas.
Since Independence, the
Union and State governments have played an important role in generating employment or creating opportunities for employment generation. Their efforts can be broadly categorised into two — direct and indirect. In the first category, as you have seen in the preceding section, the government employs people in various departments for administrative purposes. It also runs industries, hotels and transport companies, and hence, provides employment directly to workers. When the output of goods and services from government enterprises increases, then private enterprises which receive raw materials from government enterprises will also raise their output and hence increase the number of employment opportunities in the economy. For example, when a government owned
Fig. 6.7 Dam construction work is a direct way of employment generation by the government
Reprint 2026-27
109 EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES steel company increases its output, it will result in direct increase in employment in that government company. Simultaneously, private companies, which purchase steel from it, will also increase their output and thus employment. This is the indirect generation of employment opportunities by the government initiatives in the economy.
Many programmes that the governments implement, aimed at alleviating poverty, are through employment generation. They are also known as employment generation programmes. All these programmes aim at providing not only employment but also services in areas such as primary health, primary education, rural drinking water, nutrition, assistance for people to buy income and employment generating assets, development of community assets by generating wage employment, construction of houses and sanitation, assistance for constructing houses, laying of rural roads, development of wastelands/ degraded lands.
6.10 CONCLUSION
There has been a change in the structure of workforce in India. Newly emerging jobs are found mostly in the service sector. The expansion of the service sector and the advent of high technology now frequently permit a highly competitive existence for efficient small scale and often individual enterprises or specialist workers side by side with the multinationals.
Outsourcing of work is becoming a common practice. It means that a big firm finds it profitable to close down some of its specialist departments (for example, legal or computer programming or customer service sections) and hand over a large number of small piecemeal jobs to very small enterprises or specialist individuals, sometimes situated even in other countries. The traditional notion of the modern factory or office, as a result, has been altered in such a manner that for many the home is becoming the workplace. All of this change has not gone in favour of the individual worker. The nature of employment has become more informal with only limited availability of social security measures to the workers.
In the last few decades, there has been rapid growth in the gross domestic product, but without simultaneous increase in employment opportunities. This has forced the government to take up initiatives in generating employment opportunities particularly in the rural areas.
Reprint 2026-27
110 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
1. Who is a worker?
2. Define worker-population ratio.
3. Are the following workers — a beggar, a thief, a smuggler, a gambler?
ÿ All those persons who are engaged in various economic activities and hence contribute to gross national product are workers.
ÿ About two-fifth of the total population in the country is engaged in various economic activities.
ÿ Men particularly rural men, form the major section of workforce in India.
ÿ Majority of workers in India are self-employed. Casual wage labourers and regular salaried employees together account for less than half the proportion of India’s workforce.
ÿ About three-fifth of India’s workforce depends on agriculture and other allied activities as the major source of livelihood.
ÿ In recent years, the growth of employment has decelerated.
ÿ During post-reform period, India has been witness to employment opportunities in the service sector. These new jobs are found mostly in the informal sector and the nature of jobs is also mostly casual.
ÿ Government is the major formal sector employer in the country.
ÿ Disguised unemployment is a common form of unemployment in rural
ÿ There has been a change in the structure of the workforce in India.
ÿ Through various schemes and policies, the government takes initiatives to generate employment directly and indirectly.
EXERCISES
Reprint 2026-27
111 EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES
4. Find the odd man out (i) owner of a saloon (ii) a cobbler (iii) a cashier in Mother Dairy or Milk Cooperative Society of your area (iv) a tuition master (v) transport operator (vi) construction worker.
5. The newly emerging jobs are found mostly in the sector (service/manufacturing).
6. An establishement with four hired workers is known as (formal/informal) sector establishment.
7. Raj is going to school. When he is not in school, you will find him working in his farm. Can you consider him as a worker? Why?
8. Compared to urban women, more rural women are found working.
9. Meena is a housewife. Besides taking care of household chores, she works in the cloth shop which is owned and operated by her husband.
Can she be considered as a worker? Why?
10. Find the odd man out (i) rickshaw puller who works under a rick- shaw owner (ii) mason (iii) mechanic shop worker (iv) shoeshine boy.
11. The following table shows distribution of workforce in India for the year 1972-73. Analyse it and give reasons for the nature of workforce distribution. You will notice that the data is pertaining to the situation in India about 50 years ago!
Place of Residence Workforce (in millions)
Male Female Total
Rural 125 69 195
Urban 32 7 39
12. The following table shows the population and worker population ratio for India in 1999-2000. Can you estimate the workforce (urban and total) for India?
Region Estimates of Worker Estimated
Population Population No. of Workers (in crores) Ratio (in crores)
Rural 71.88 41.9 71.88 × 41.9 = 30.12
Urban 28.52 33.7 ?
Total 100.40 39.5 ?
Reprint 2026-27
112 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
13. Why are regular salaried employees more in urban areas than in rural areas?
14. Why are less women found in regular salaried employment?
15. Analyse the recent trends in sectoral distribution of workforce in India.
16. Compared to the 1970s, there has hardly been any change in the distribution of workforce across various industries. Comment.
17. Do you think that during 1950-2010 employment generated in the country is commensurate with the growth of GDP in India? How?
18. Is it necessary to generate employment in the formal sector rather than in the informal sector? Why?
19. Victor is able to get work only for two hours in a day. Rest of the day, he is looking for work. Is he unemployed? Why? What kind of jobs could persons like Victor be doing?
20. You are residing in a village. If you are asked to advice the village panchayat, what kinds of activities would you suggest for the improvement of your village which would also generate employment.
21. Who is a casual wage labourer?
22. How will you know whether a worker is working in the informal sector?
1. Select a region, say a street or colony, and divide it into 3-4 sub-regions. Conduct a survey by which you can collect the details of activity each person living there is engaged in. Derive the worker-population ratio for all the regions. Interpret the results for differences in worker-population ratio for the different sub-regions.
2. Suppose 3-4 groups of students are given different regions of a state.
One region is mainly engaged in cultivation of paddy. In another region, coconut is the main plantation. The third region is a coastal region where fishing is the main activity. The fourth region has a river nearby with a lot of livestock rearing activities. Ask all the four groups to develop a report on what kind of employment could be generated in the four regions.
3. Visit the local library and ask for Employment News, a weekly published by the Government of India. Go through each issue for the last two months. There will be seven issues. Select 25 advertisements and
SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES
Reprint 2026-27
113 EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES fill in the following table (expand the table as needed). Discuss the nature of jobs in the classroom.
Items Advertisement 1 Advertisement 2
1. Name of Office
2. Department/company
3. Private/public/joint venture
4. Name of the post
5. Sector—primary/seconday/
6. Number of posts/vacancies
7. Qualification required
4. You might notice, in your locality, a variety of works being done by the government, for example laying of roads, desilting of tanks, construction of school buildings, hospital and other government offices, construction of check dams and houses for the poor etc.
Prepare a critical assessment report on one such activity. The issues covered could be the following (i) how the work was identified (ii)
amount sanctioned (iii) contribution of local people, if any (iv) number of persons involved — both men and women (v) wages paid (vi) is it really required in that area and other critical comments on the implementation of the scheme under which the work is being carried
5. In recent years, you may have noticed that many voluntary organisations also take initiatives to generate employment in hilly and dry land regions. If you find such initiatives in your locality, visit and prepare a report.
CHADHA, G.K. and P.P. SAHU, 2002. ‘Post-reform Setbacks in Rural Employment:
Issues that need further scrutiny.’ Economic and Political Weekly, May
25, pp.1998-2026.
DESAI, S and M.B.DAS. 2004. ‘Is Employment Driving India’s Growth Surge’,
Economic and Political Weekly, July 3, pp. 3045-3051.
GHOSE, AJIT K. 1999. ‘Current Issues of Employment Policy in India.’ Economic and Political Weekly, September 4, pp. 2592-2608.
HIRWAY, INDIRA. 2002. ‘Employment and Unemployment Situation in 1990s:
How Good are NSS Data.’ Economic and Political Weekly, May 25, pp. 2027-2036.
REFERENCES
Reprint 2026-27
114 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
JACOB, PAUL. 1986. ‘Concept of ‘work’ and estimates of ‘workforce’ — An appraisal of the treatment of activities relating to non-marketed output,’
Sarvekshana, Vol.IX, No.4, April.
KULSHRESHTHA, A.C., GULAB SINGH, ALOK KAR and R.L. MISHRA. 2000. ‘Workforce in the Indian National Accounts Statistics,’ The Journal of Income and
Wealth, Vol.22, No.2, July, pp. 3-39.
PRADHAN, B.K. and M.R.SALUJA. 1996. ‘Labour Statistics in India: A Review.’
Margin, July- September, Vol.28, Number 4, pp. 319-347.
RATH, NILAKANTHA. 2001. ‘Data on Employment, Unemployment and Education:
Where to go from here?’ Economic and Political Weekly, June 9, pp. 2081-2087.
SUNDARAM, K. 2001. ‘Employment-Unemployment Situation in the Nineties:
Some Results from NSS 55th Round Survey’, Economic and Political
Weekly, March 17, pp. 931-940.
SUNDARAM, K. 2001. ‘Employment and Poverty in 1990s: Further Results from
NSS 55th Round Employment-Unemployment Survey, 1999-2000,’
Economic and Political Weekly, August 11, pp. 3039-3049.
VISARIA, PRAVIN. 1996. ‘Structure of the Indian Workforce, 1961-1994,’ The
Indian Journal of Labour Economics, Vol.39, No.4, pp. 725-740.
Government Reports Government Reports Government Reports Government Reports Government Reports
Annual Reports, Ministry of Labour, Government of India, Delhi.
Census of India 2011, Primary Census Abstract, Registrar General of Census
Operations, Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, Delhi.
Economic Survey, Ministry of Finance, Government of India.
Reports on Employment and Unemployment Situation in India, Ministry of
Statistics and Planning, Government of India.
Annual Report, Periodic Labour Force Survey (for various years), National
Sample Survey Office, Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation, Government of India, New Delhi.
W W W W Websites ebsites ebsites ebsites ebsites www.censusofindia.nic.in www.mospi.nic.in
Reprint 2026-27
115 ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
After studying this chapter, the learners will
• understand the concept of environment
• analyse the causes and effects of ‘environmental degradation’ and ‘resource depletion’
• understand the nature of environmental challenges facing India
• relate environmental issues to the larger context of sustainable development.
ENVIRONMENT AND
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Reprint 2026-27
