120 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT and misuse. Hence the environmental issues of waste generation and pollution have become critical
7.3 STATE OF INDIA’S
ENVIRONMENT
India has abundant natural resources in terms of rich quality of soil, hundreds of rivers and tributaries, lush green forests, plenty of mineral deposits beneath the land surface, vast stretch of the Indian Ocean, ranges of mountains, etc. The black soil of the
Deccan Plateau is particularly suitable for cultivation of cotton, leading to concentration of textile industries in this region. The Indo-Gangetic plains — spread from the Arabian Sea to the Bay of Bengal — are one of the most fertile, intensively cultivated and densely populated regions in the world. India’s forests, though unevenly distributed, provide green cover for a majority of its population and natural cover for its wildlife. Large deposits of iron-ore, coal and natural gas are found in the country. India accounts for nearly
8 per cent of the world’s total iron-ore reserves. Bauxite, copper, chromate, diamonds, gold, lead, lignite, manganese, zinc, uranium, etc. are also available in different parts of the country. However, the developmental activities in India have resulted in pressure on its finite natural resources, besides creating impacts on human health and well-being. The threat to India’s environment poses a dichotomy —threat of poverty-induced environmental degradation and, at the same time, threat of pollution from affluence and a rapidly growing industrial sector. Air pollution, water contamination, soil erosion, deforestation and wildlife extinction are some of the most pressing environmental concerns of India. The priority issues identified are (i) land degradation (ii) biodiversity loss (iii) air pollution with special reference to vehicular pollution in urban cities (iv)
management of fresh water and (v) solid waste management. Land in India suffers from varying degrees and types of degradation stemming mainly from unstable use and inappropriate management practices.
Fig. 7.3 Deforestation leads to land degradation, biodiversity loss and air pollution
Reprint 2026-27
121 ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Box. 7.3: Chipko or Appiko — What’s in a Name?
You may be aware of the Chipko Movement, which aimed at protecting forests in the Himalayas. In Karnataka, a similar movement took a different name,
‘Appiko’, which means to hug. On 8 September 1983, when the felling of trees was started in Salkani forest in Sirsi district, 160 men, women and children hugged the trees and forced the woodcutters to leave. They kept vigil in the forest over the next six weeks. Only after the forest officials assured the volunteers that the trees will be cut scientifically and in accordance with the working plan of the district, did they leave the trees.
When commercial felling by contractors damaged a large number of natural forests, the idea of hugging the trees gave the people hope and confidence that they can protect the forests. On that particular incident, with the felling discontinued, the people saved
12,000 trees. Within months, this movement spread to many adjoining districts.
Indiscriminate felling of trees for fuelwood and for industrial use has led to many environmental problems.
Twelve years after setting up of a paper mill in Uttar Kanara area, bamboo has been wiped out from that area. “Broad-leaved trees which protected the soil from the direct onslaught of rain have been removed, the soil washed away, and bare laterite soil left behind. Now nothing grows but a weed”, says a farmer. Farmers also complain that rivers and rivulets dry up quicker, and that rainfall is becoming erratic. Diseases and insects earlier unknown are now attacking the crops.
Appiko volunteers want the contractors and forest officials to follow certain rules and restrictions. For instance, local people should be consulted when trees are marked for felling and trees within 100 metres of a water source and on a slope of 30 degrees or above should not be felled.
Do you know that the government allocates forestlands to industries to use forest materials as industrial raw material? Even if a paper mill employs
10,000 workers and a plywood factory employs 800 people but if they deprive the daily needs of a million people, is it acceptable? What do you think?
Source: Excerpts from ‘State of India’s Environment 2: The Second Citizens’ Report 1984-85’,
Centre for Science and Environment, 1996, New Delhi.
Reprint 2026-27
122 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Work These Out
ÿ In order to enable the students to appreciate the contribution of environment to economic development, the following game can be introduced. One student may name a product used by any enterprise and the other student may trace out its roots to nature and earth.
trucks steel and rubber steel iron mineral earth rubber trees forests earth books paper trees forest earth cloth cotton plant nature petrol earth machinery iron mineral earth
ÿ A truck driver had to pay Rs 10,000 as challan as his truck was emitting black soot. Why do you think he was penalised? Was it justified? Discuss.
Some of the factors responsible for land degradation are (i) loss of vegetation occuring due to deforestation (ii) unsustainable fuel wood and fodder extraction (iii) shifting cultivation (iv) encroachment into forest lands (v) forest fires and over grazing (vi) non-adoption of adequate soil conservation measures (vii) improper crop rotation (viii) indiscriminate use of agro-chemicals such as fertilisers and pesticides (ix) improper planning and management of irrigation systems (x) extraction of ground water in the competing uses of land for forestry, agriculture, pastures, human settlements and industries exert an enormous pressure on the country’s finite land resources.
The per capita forest land in the country is only 0.06 hectare against the requirement of 0.47 hectare to meet basic needs, resulting in an excess felling of about 15 million cubic metre forests over the permissible limit.
Estimates of soil erosion show that soil is being eroded at a rate of 5.3 billion tonnes a year for the entire excess of the recharge capacity (xi)
open access resource and (xii) poverty of the agriculture-dependent people.
India supports approximately 17 per cent of the world’s human and 20 per cent of livestock population on a mere 2.5 per cent of the world’s geographical area. The high density of population and livestock and country as a result of which the country loses 0.8 million tonnes of nitrogen, 1.8 million tonnes of phosphorus and 26.3 million tonnes of potassium every year. According to the Government of India, the quantity of nutrients lost due to erosion each year ranges from 5.8 to 8.4 million
Reprint 2026-27
123 ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Box 7.4 : Pollution Control Boards
In order to address two major environmental concerns in India, viz. water and air pollution, the government set up the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB)
in 1974. This was followed by states establishing their own state level boards to address all the environmental concerns. They investigate, collect and disseminate information relating to water, air and land pollution, lay down standards for sewage/trade effluent and emissions. These boards provide technical assistance to governments in promoting cleanliness of streams and wells by prevention, control and abatement of water pollution, and improve the quality of air and to prevent, control or abate air pollution in the country.
These boards also carry out and sponsor investigation and research relating to problems of water and air pollution and for their prevention, control or abatement. They organise, through mass media, a comprehensive mass awareness programme for the same. The PCBs prepare manuals, codes and guidelines relating to treatment and disposal of sewage and trade effluents.
They assess the air quality through regulation of industries. In fact, state boards, through their district level officials, periodically inspect every industry under their jurisdiction to assess the adequacy of treatment measures provided to treat the effluent and gaseous emissions. It also provides background air quality data needed for industrial siting and town planning.
The pollution control boards collect, collate and disseminate technical and statistical data relating to water pollution. They monitor the quality of water in 125 rivers (including the tributaries), wells, lakes, creeks, ponds, tanks, drains and canals.
ÿ Visit a nearby factory/irrigation department and collect the details of measures that they adopt to control water and air pollution.
ÿ You might be seeing advertisements in newspapers, radio and television or billboards in your locality on awareness programmes relating to water and air pollution. Collect a few news-clippings, pamphlets and other information and discuss them in the classroom.
In India, air pollution is widespread in urban areas where vehicles are the major contributors and in a few other areas which have a high concentra- tion of industries and thermal power plants. Vehicular emissions are of par- ticular concern since these are ground level sources and, thus, have the maximum impact on the general population. The number of motor vehicles has increased from about 3 lakh in 1951 to 35 crores in 2022.
During this year, two-wheeled vehicles and cars constituted about 85 per cent of the total number of registered vehicles thus contribute significantly to total air pollution load.
India is one of the ten most industrialised nations of the world.
But this status has brought with it unwanted and unanticipated consequences such as unplanned urbanisation, pollution and the risk of accidents. The CPCB (Central Pollution
Reprint 2026-27
