124 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Control Board) has identified seventeen categories of industries (large and medium scale) as significantly polluting (See Box 7.4).
allow all future generations to have a potential average quality of life that is at least as high as that which is being enjoyed by the current generation. The concept of sustainable development was emphasised by the United Nations
Conference on Environment and
Development (UNCED), which defined it as: ‘Development that meets the need of the present generation without compromising the ability of the future generation to meet their own needs’.
Read the definition again. You will notice that the term ‘need’ and the phrase ‘future generations’ in the definition are the catch phrases. The use of the concept ‘needs’ in the definition is linked to distribution of resources. The seminal report —
Common Future — that gave the above definition explained sustainable development as ‘meeting the basic needs of all and extending to all the opportunity to satisfy their aspirations for a better life’. Meeting the needs of all requires redistributing resources and is hence a moral issue.
Edward Barbier defined sustainable development as one which is directly concerned with increasing the material standard of living of the poor at the grass root level — this can be quantitatively measured in terms of increased income, real income, educational services, health care, sanitation, water supply etc. In more specific terms, sustainable development aims at decreasing the absolute poverty of the poor by providing lasting and secure livelihoods that minimise resource depletion, environmental
The above points highlight the challenges to India’s environment. The various measures adopted by the
Ministry of Environment and the central and state pollution control boards may not yield reward unless we consciously adopt a path of sustainable development. The concern for future generations alone can make development last forever. Development to enhance our current living styles, without concern for posterity, will deplete resources and degrade environment at a pace that is bound to result in both environmental and economic crisis.
7.4 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Environment and economy are interdependent and need each other.
Hence, development that ignores its repercussions on the environment will destroy the environment that sustains life forms. What is needed is sustainable development: development that will
Work This Out
ÿ You can see a column on the measure of air pollution in any national daily. Cut out the news item a week before
Diwali, on the day of Diwali and two days after Diwali.
Do you observe a significant difference in the value?
Discuss in your class.
Reprint 2026-27
