125 ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT degradation, cultural disruption and social instability. Sustainable development is, in this sense, a development that meets the basic needs of all, particularly the poor majority, for employment, food, energy, water, housing, and ensures growth of agriculture, manufacturing, power and services to meet these needs.
The Brundtland Commission emphasises on protecting the future generation. This is in line with the argument of the environmentalists who emphasise that we have a moral obligation to hand over the planet earth in good order to the future generation;
that is, the present generation should bequeath a better environment to the future generation. At least we should leave to the next generation a stock of
‘quality of life’ assets no less than what we have inherited.
The present generation can promote development that enhances the natural and built environment in ways that are compatible with (i) conservation of natural assets (ii) preservation of the regenerative capacity of the world’s natural ecological system (iii) avoiding the imposition of added costs or risks on future generations.
According to Herman Daly, a leading environmental economist, to achieve sustainable development, the following needs to be done (i) limiting the human population to a level within the carrying capacity of the environment. The carrying capacity of the environment is like a‘plimsoll line’ of the ship which is its load limit mark. In the absence of the plimsoll line for the economy, human scale grows beyond the carrying capacity of the earth and deviates from sustainable development (ii) technological progress should be input efficient and not input consuming (iii) renewable resources should be extracted on a sustainable basis, that is, rate of extraction should not exceed rate of regeneration (iv) for non-renewable resources rate of depletion should not exceed the rate of creation of renewable substitutes and (v) inefficiencies arising from pollution should be corrected. In
2015, the UN formulated 17 Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) intended to be achieved by the year 2030. Collect the details of those goals and discuss them in the context of India.
7.5 STRATEGIES FOR SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT
Use of Non-conventional Sources of
Energy: India, as you know, is hugely dependent on thermal and hydro power plants to meet its power needs. Both of these have adverse environmental impacts. Thermal power plants emit large quantities of carbon dioxide which is a green house gas. It also produces fly ash which, if not used properly, can cause pollution of water bodies, land and other components of the environment. Hydroelectric projects inundate forests and interfere with the natural flow of water in catchment areas and the river basins. Wind power and solar rays are good examples of conventional sources of energy. In recent years, some efforts are being taken to tap these energy resources. Collect the details of one such unit set up in your area if any, and discuss in the class.
Reprint 2026-27
126 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
LPG, Gobar Gas in Rural Areas:
Households in rural areas generally use wood, dung cake or other biomass as fuel. This practice has several adverse implications like deforestation, reduction in green cover, wastage of cattle dung and air pollution. To rectify the situation, subsidised LPG is being provided. In addition, gobar gas plants are being provided through easy loans and subsidy. As far as liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) is concerned, it is a clean fuel — it reduces household pollution to a large extent. Also, energy wastage is minimised. For the gobar gas plant to function, cattle dung is fed to the plant and gas is produced which is used as fuel while the slurry which is left over is a very good organic fertiliser and soil conditioner.
CNG in Urban Areas: In Delhi, the use of Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) as fuel in public transport system has significantly lowered air pollution and the air has become cleaner. In the last few years many other Indian cities also began to use CNG.
Wind Power: In areas where speed of wind is usually high, wind mills can provide electricity without any adverse impact on the environment. Wind turbines move with the wind and electricity is generated. No doubt, the initial cost is high. But the benefits are such that the high cost gets easily absorbed.
Work This Out
ÿ In Delhi, buses and other public transport vehicles uses CNG as fuel instead of petrol or diesel; some vehicles use convertible engines;
solar energy is being used to light up the streets. What do you think about these changes? Delhi also adopted odd/even scheme to restrict the use of vehicles with registration ending with odd/even numbers on alternative days, for specific period in a year. Organise a debate in class on the need for sustainable development practices in India.
Fig.7.4 Gobar Gas Plant uses cattle dung to produce energy
Reprint 2026-27
127 ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Solar Power through Photovoltaic
Cells: India is naturally endowed with a large quantity of solar energy in the form of sunlight. We use it in different ways. For example, we dry our clothes, grains, other agricultural products as well as various items made for daily use.
We also use sunlight to warm ourselves in winter. Plants use solar energy to perform photosynthesis. Now, with the help of photovoltaic cells, solar energy can be converted into electricity. These cells use special kind of materials to capture solar energy and then convert the energy into electricity. This technology is extremely useful for remote areas and for places where supply of power through grid or power lines is either not possible or proves very costly.
This technique is also totally free from pollution. In recent years India is taking efforts to increase the power generation through solar. India is also leading an
International body called International
Solar Alliance (ISA).
Mini-hydel Plants: In mountainous regions, streams can be found almost everywhere. A large percentage of such streams are perennial. Mini-hydel plants use the energy of such streams to move small turbines. The turbines generate electricity which can be used locally. Such power plants are more or less environment-friendly as they do not change the land use pattern in areas where they are located; they generate enough power to meet local demands.
This means that they can also do away with the need for large scale transmission towers and cables and avoid transmission loss.
Traditional Knowledge and
Practices: Traditionally, Indian people have been close to their environment.
They have been more a component of the environment and not its controller.
If we look back at our agriculture system, healthcare system, housing, transport etc., we find that all practices have been environment friendly. Only recently have we drifted away from the traditional systems and caused large scale damage to the environment and also our rural heritage. Now, it is time to go back. One apt example is in healthcare. India is very much privileged to have about 15,000 species of plants which have medicinal properties. About 8,000 of these are in regular use in various systems of treatment including the folk tradition.
With the sudden onslaught of the western system of treatment, we ignored our traditional systems such as Ayurveda, Unani, Tibetan and folk systems. These healthcare systems are in great demand again for treating chronic health problems. Now a days every cosmetic produce — hair oil, toothpaste, body lotion, face cream and what not — is herbal in composition.
Not only are these products environment friendly, they are relatively free from side effects and do not involve large-scale industrial and chemical processing.
Biocomposting: In our quest to increase agricultural production during the last five decades or so, we almost totally neglected the use of compost and completely switched over to chemical fertilisers. The result is that large tracts of productive land have
Reprint 2026-27
128 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT been adversely affected, water bodies including ground water system have suffered due to chemical contamination and demand for irrigation has been going up year after year.
Farmers, in large numbers all over the country, have again started using compost made from organic wastes of different types. In certain parts of the country, cattle are maintained only because they produce dung which is an important fertiliser and soil conditioner.
Earthworms can convert organic matter into compost faster than the normal composting process. This process is now being widely used.
Indirectly, the civic authorities are benefited too as they have to dispose reduced quantity of waste.
Biopest Control: With the advent of green revolution, the entire country entered into a frenzy to use more and more chemical pesticides for higher yield. Soon, the adverse impacts began to show; food products were contaminated, soil, water bodies and even ground water were polluted with pesticides. Even milk, meat and fishes were found to be contaminated.
To meet this challenge, efforts are on to bring in better methods of pest control. One such step is the use of pesticides based on plant products.
Neem trees are proving to be quite useful. Several types of pest controlling chemicals have been isolated from neem and these are being used. Mixed cropping and growing different crops in consecutive years on the same land have also helped farmers.
In addition, awareness is spreading about various animals and birds which help in controlling pests. For example, snakes are one of the prime group of animals which prey upon rats, mice and various other pests. Similarly, large varieties of birds, for example, owls and peacocks, prey upon vermin and pests.
If these are allowed to dwell around the agricultural areas, they can clear large varieties of pests including insects.
Lizards are also important in this regard. We need to know their value and save them.
Sustainable development has become a catch phrase today. It is
‘indeed’ a paradigm shift in development thinking. Though it has been interpreted in a number of ways, adherence to this path ensures lasting development and non-declining welfare for all.
7.6 CONCLUSION
Economic development, which aimed at increasing the production of goods and services to meet the needs of a rising population, puts greater pressure on the environment. In the initial stages of development, the demand for environmental resources was less than that of supply. Now the world is faced with increased demand for environmental resources but their supply is limited due to overuse and misuse. Sustainable development aims at promoting the kind of development that minimises environmental problems and meets the needs of the present generation without compromising the ability of the future generation to meet their own needs.
Reprint 2026-27
129 ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
1. What is meant by environment?
2. What happens when the rate of resource extraction exceeds that of their regeneration?
3. Classify the following into renewable and non-renewable resources (i) trees (ii) fish (iii) petroleum (iv) coal (v) iron-ore (vi) water.
4. Two major environmental issues facing the world today are ____________ and _____________.
5. How do the following factors contribute to the environmental crisis in India? What problem do they pose for the government?
(i) Rising population (ii) Air pollution
EXERCISES
ÿ Environment performs four functions: supplies resources, assimilates wastes, sustains life by providing genetic and bio diversity and provides aesthetic services.
ÿ Population explosion, affluent consumption and production have placed a huge stress on the environment.
ÿ Developmental activities in India have put immense pressure on its finite natural resources, besides creating impact on human health and well-being.
ÿ The threat to India’s environment is of two dimensions — threat of poverty induced environmental degradation and the threat of pollution from affluence and a rapidly growing industrial sector.
ÿ Though the government, through various measures, attempts to safeguard the environment, it is also necessary to adopt a path of sustainable development.
ÿ Sustainable development is development that meets the need of the present generation without compromising the ability of the future generation to meet their own needs.
ÿ Promotion of natural resources, conservation, preserving regenerative capacity of ecological system and avoiding the imposition of environmental risks on future generations would lead to sustainable development.
Reprint 2026-27
130 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (iii) Water contamination (iv) Affluent consumption standards (v) Illiteracy (vi) Industrialisation (vii) Urbanisation (viii) Reduction of forest coverage (ix) Poaching, and (x) Global warming.
6. What are the functions of the environment?
7. Identify six factors contributing to land degradation in India.
8. Explain how the opportunity costs of negative environmental impact are high.
9. Outline the steps involved in attaining sustainable development in India.
10. India has abundant natural resources — substantiate the statement.
11. Is environmental crisis a recent phenomenon? If so, why?
12. Give two instances of (a) Overuse of environmental resources (b) Misuse of environmental resources.
13. State any four pressing environmental concerns of India.
14. Correction for environmental damages involves opportunity costs — explain.
15. Explain how the supply-demand reversal of environmental resources account for the current environmental crisis.
16. Highlight any two serious adverse environmental consequences of development in India. India’s environmental problems pose a dichotomy
— they are poverty induced and, at the same time, due to affluence in living standards — is this true?
17. What is sustainable development?
18. Keeping in view your locality, describe any four strategies of sustainable development.
19. Explain the relevance of intergenerational equity in the definition of sustainable development.
1. Suppose 70 lakh cars are added every year to the roads of metropolitans.
Which type of resources do you think are undergoing depletion? Discuss.
2. Make a list of items that can be recycled.
SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES
Reprint 2026-27
131 ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
3. Prepare a chart on the causes and remedies of soil erosion in India.
4. How does population explosion contribute to the environmental crisis?
Debate in the classroom.
5. The nation has to pay heavily for correcting environmental damages — discuss.
6. A paper factory is to be set up in your village. Arrange a role play consisting of an activist, an industrialist and a group of villagers.
AGARWAL, ANIL and SUNITA NARAIN. 1996. Global Warming in an Unequal World.
Centre for Science and Environment, Reprint Edition, New Delhi.
BHARUCHA, E. 2005. Textbook of Environmental Studies for Undergraduate
Courses, Universities Press (India) Pvt Ltd.
CENTRE FOR SCIENCE AND ENVIRONMENT. 1996. State of India’s Environment
1: The First Citizens’ Report 1982. Reprint Edition, New Delhi.
CENTRE FOR SCIENCE AND ENVIRONMENT. 1996. State of India’s Environment
2: The Second Citizens’ Report 1985, Reprint Edition, New Delhi.
KARPAGAM, M. 2001.Environmental Economics: A Textbook. Sterling Publishers,
New Delhi.
RAJAGOPALAN, R. 2005. Environmental Studies: From Crisis to Cure. Oxford
University Press, New Delhi.
SCHUMACHER, E.F. Small is Beautiful. Abacus Publishers, New York.
State of India’s Environment (for various years), Centre for Science and
Environment, New Delhi.
Journals
Scientific American, India, Special Issue, September 2005
Down to Earth, Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi.
Websites http://envfor.nic.in http://cpcb.nic.in http://www.cseindia.org
REFERENCES
Reprint 2026-27
DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA: A COMPARISON
WITH NEIGHBOURS
Reprint 2026-27
In today’s globalised world, where geographical boundaries are slowly becoming meaningless, it is important for neighbouring countries in the developing world to understand the development strategies being pursued by their neighbours. This is more so because they share the relatively limited economic space in world markets. In this unit, we will compare India’s developmental experiences with two of its important and strategic neighbours
— Pakistan and China.
Reprint 2026-27
