135 COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS
8.1 INTRODUCTION
In the preceding units we studied the developmental experience of India in detail. We also studied the kind of policies India adopted, which had varying impacts in different sectors.
Over the last two decades or so, the economic transformation that is taking place in different countries across the world, partly because of the process of globalisation, has both short as well as long-term implications for each country, including India. Nations have been primarily trying to adopt various means which will strengthen their own domestic economies. To this effect, they are forming regional and global economic groupings such as the SAARC, European Union,
ASEAN, G-8, G-20, BRICS etc. In addition, there is also an increasing eagerness on the parts of various nations to try and understand the developmental processes pursued by their neighbouring nations as it allows them to better comprehend their own strengths and weaknesses vis-à-vis their neighbours. In the unfolding process of globalisation, this is particularly considered essential by developing countries as they face competition not only from developed nations but also amongst themselves in the relatively limited economic space enjoyed by the developing world. Besides, an understanding of the other economies in our neighbourhood is also required as all major common economic activities in the region impinge on overall human development in a shared environment.
In this chapter we will compare the developmental strategies pursued by
India and the largest two of its neighbouring economies—Pakistan and China. It has to be remembered that despite being endowed with vast natural resources, there is little similarity between the political power setup of India - the largest democracy of the world which is wedded to a secular and deeply liberal Constitution for more than half a century, and the militarist political power structure of
Pakistan or the command economy of China that has only recently started moving towards a democratic system and more liberal economic restructuring respectively.
8.2 DE V E L O P M E N T A L PA T H —A
SNAPSHOT VIEW
Do you know that India, Pakistan and
China have many similarities in their developmental strategies? All the three nations have started towards their developmental path at the same time.
While India and Pakistan became independent nations in 1947, People’s
Republic of China was established in
1949. In a speech at that time,
Geography has made us neighbours. History has made us friends. Economics has made us partners, and necessity has made us allies. Those whom God has so joined together, let no man put asunder.
John F. Kennedy
Reprint 2026-27
136 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Jawaharlal Nehru had said, “These new and revolutionary changes in
China and India, even though they differ in content, symbolise the new spirit of Asia and new vitality which is finding expression in the countries in
All three countries had started planning their development strategies in similar ways. While India announced its first Five Year Plan for
1951–56, Pakistan announced its first five year plan, now called the Medium
Term Development Plan, in 1956.
China announced its First Five Year
Plan in 1953. Since 2018, Pakistan is working on the basis of 12th Five Year
Development Plan (2018–23), whereas,
China is working on 14th Five Year
Plan (2021–25). Until March 2017,
India has been following Five Year
Plan- based development model. India and Pakistan adopted similar strategies, such as creating a large public sector and raising public expenditure on social development.
Till the 1980s, all the three countries had similar growth rates and per capita incomes. Where do they stand today in comparison to one another? Before we answer this question, let us trace the historical path of developmental policies in China and Pakistan. After studying the last three units, we already know what policies India has been adopting since its Independence.
China: After the establishment of
People’s Republic of China under one- party rule, all critical sectors of the economy, enterprises and lands owned and operated by individuals were brought under government control.
The Great Leap Forward (GLF)
campaign initiated in 1958 aimed at industrialising the country on a massive scale. People were encouraged to set up industries in their backyards.
In rural areas, communes were started. Under the Commune system, people collectively cultivated lands. In
1958, there were 26,000 communes covering almost all the farm population.
GLF campaign met with many problems. A severe drought caused havoc in China killing about 30 million people. When Russia had conflicts with
China, it withdrew its professionals who had earlier been sent to China to help in the industrialisation process.
In 1965, Mao introduced the Great
Proletarian Cultural Revolution (1966–76) under which students and professionals were sent to work and learn from the countryside.
The present day fast industrial growth in China can be traced back to the reforms introduced in 1978. China introduced reforms in phases. In the initial phase, reforms were initiated in agriculture, foreign trade and investment sectors. In agriculture, for instance, commune lands were divided into small plots, which were allocated (for use not ownership) to individual households. They were allowed to keep all income from the land after paying stipulated taxes. In the later phase, reforms were initiated in the industrial sector. Private sector firms, in general, and township and village enterprises, i.e., those enterprises which were owned and operated by local collectives, in particular, were allowed to produce
Reprint 2026-27
137 COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS goods. At this stage, enterprises owned by government (known as State Owned
Enterprises—SOEs), which we, in
India, call public sector enterprises, were made to face competition. The reform process also involved dual pricing. This means fixing the prices in two ways; farmers and industrial units were required to buy and sell fixed quantities of inputs and outputs on the basis of prices fixed by the government and the rest were purchased and sold at market prices. Over the years, as production increased, the proportion of goods or inputs transacted in the market also increased. In order to attract foreign investors, special economic zones were set up.
Pakistan: While looking at various economic policies that Pakistan adopted, you will notice many similarities with India. Pakistan also follows the mixed economy model with co-existence of public and private sectors. In the late 1950s and 1960s,
Pakistan introduced a variety of regulated policy framework (for import substitution-based industrialisation).
The policy combined tariff protection for manufacturing of consumer goods together with direct import controls on competing imports. The introduction of
Green Revolution led to mechanisation and increase in public investment in infrastructure in select areas, which finally led to a rise in the production of foodgrains. This changed the agrarian structure dramatically. In the 1970s, nationalisation of capital goods industries took place. Pakistan then shifted its policy orientation in the late
1970s and 1980s when the major thrust areas were denationalisation and encouragement of private sector.
During this period, Pakistan also received financial support from western nations and remittances from
Fig. 8.1 Wagah Border is not only a tourist place but also used for trade between India and Pakistan
Reprint 2026-27
