23 Theory of Consumer
Behaviour gives the amount of the good that the consumer chooses at different levels of its price when the other things remain unchanged. The consumer’s demand for a good as a function of its price can be written as
X = f (P) (2.12)
where X denotes the quantity and P denotes the price of the good.
The demand function can also be represented graphically as in Figure 2.13.
The graphical representation of the demand function is called the demand curve.
The relation between the consumer’s demand for a good and the price of the good is likely to be negative in general. In other words, the amount of a good that a consumer would optimally choose is likely to increase when the price of the good falls and it is likely to decrease with a rise in the price of the good.
2.4.2 Deriving a Demand Curve from Indifference Curves and Budget
Constraints
Consider an individual consuming bananas (X1)and mangoes (X2), whose income is M and market prices of X1 and X2 are 1 P ' and 2 P ' respectively. Figure (a) depicts her consumption equilibrium at point C, where she buys 1 X ' and 2 X ' quantities of bananas and mangoes respectively. In panel (b) of figure 2.14, we plot 1 P ' against 1 X ' which is the first point on the demand curve for X1.
Suppose the price of X1 drops to 1 P with 2 P ' and M remaining constant. The budget set in panel (a), expands and new consumption equilibrium is on a higher indifference curve at point D, where she buys more of bananas ( > 1 1 X X ' ).
Thus, demand for bananas increases as its price drops. We plot 1 P against 1 X in panel (b) of figure 2.14 to get the second point on the demand curve for X1.
Likewise the price of bananas can be dropped further to ∧
1 P , resulting in further increase in consumption of bananas to ∧
1 P plotted against ∧
1 X gives us the third point on the demand curve. Therefore, we observe that a drop in price of bananas results in an increase in quality of bananas purchased by an individual who maximises his utility. The demand curve for bananas is thus negatively
The negative slope of the demand curve can also be explained in terms of the two effects namely, substitution effect and income effect that come into play when price of a commodity changes. When bananas become cheaper, the consumer maximises his utility by substituting bananas for mangoes in order to derive the same level of satisfaction of a price change, resulting in an increase in demand for bananas.
Deriving a demand curve from indifference curves and budget constraints
Reprint 2026-27
