23 Theory of Consumer
Behaviour gives the amount of the good that the consumer chooses at different levels of its price when the other things remain unchanged. The consumer’s demand for a good as a function of its price can be written as
X = f (P) (2.12)
where X denotes the quantity and P denotes the price of the good.
The demand function can also be represented graphically as in Figure 2.13.
The graphical representation of the demand function is called the demand curve.
The relation between the consumer’s demand for a good and the price of the good is likely to be negative in general. In other words, the amount of a good that a consumer would optimally choose is likely to increase when the price of the good falls and it is likely to decrease with a rise in the price of the good.
2.4.2 Deriving a Demand Curve from Indifference Curves and Budget
Constraints
Consider an individual consuming bananas (X1)and mangoes (X2), whose income is M and market prices of X1 and X2 are 1 P ' and 2 P ' respectively. Figure (a) depicts her consumption equilibrium at point C, where she buys 1 X ' and 2 X ' quantities of bananas and mangoes respectively. In panel (b) of figure 2.14, we plot 1 P ' against 1 X ' which is the first point on the demand curve for X1.
Suppose the price of X1 drops to 1 P with 2 P ' and M remaining constant. The budget set in panel (a), expands and new consumption equilibrium is on a higher indifference curve at point D, where she buys more of bananas ( > 1 1 X X ' ).
Thus, demand for bananas increases as its price drops. We plot 1 P against 1 X in panel (b) of figure 2.14 to get the second point on the demand curve for X1.
Likewise the price of bananas can be dropped further to ∧
1 P , resulting in further increase in consumption of bananas to ∧
1 P plotted against ∧
1 X gives us the third point on the demand curve. Therefore, we observe that a drop in price of bananas results in an increase in quality of bananas purchased by an individual who maximises his utility. The demand curve for bananas is thus negatively
The negative slope of the demand curve can also be explained in terms of the two effects namely, substitution effect and income effect that come into play when price of a commodity changes. When bananas become cheaper, the consumer maximises his utility by substituting bananas for mangoes in order to derive the same level of satisfaction of a price change, resulting in an increase in demand for bananas.
Deriving a demand curve from indifference curves and budget constraints
Reprint 2026-27
Introductory
Microeconomics
Moreover, as price of bananas drops, consumer’s purchasing power increases, which further increases demand for bananas (and mangoes). This is the income effect of a price change, resulting in further increase in demand for bananas.
Law of Demand: Law of Demand states that other things being equal, there is a negative relation between demand for a commodity and its price. In other words, when price of the commodity increases, demand for it falls and when price of the commodity decreases, demand for it rises, other factors remaining the same.
Linear Demand
A linear demand curve can be written d(p) = a – bp; 0 ≤ p ≤ a
= 0; p > a b (2.13)
where a is the vertical intercept, –b is the slope of the demand curve. At price 0, the demand is a, and at price equal to a b , the demand is 0. The slope of the demand curve measures the rate at which demand changes with respect to its price. For a unit increase in the price of the good, the demand falls by b units. Figure 2.15 depicts a linear demand curve.
2.4.3 Normal and Inferior Goods
The demand function is a relation between the consumer’s demand for a good and its price when other things are given. Instead of studying the relation between the demand for a good and its price, we can also study the relation between the consumer’s demand for the good and the income of the consumer.
T h e q u a n t i t y o f a g o o d t h a t t h e consumer demands can increase or decrease with the rise in income depending on the nature of the good.
For most goods, the quantity that a consumer chooses, increases as the consumer’s income increases and decreases as the consumer’s income decreases. Such goods are called normal goods. Thus, a consumer’s demand for a normal good moves in the same direction as the income of the consumer. However, there are some goods the demands for which move in the opposite direction of the income of the consumer. Such goods are called inferior goods. As the income of the consumer increases, the demand for an inferior good falls, and as the income decreases, the demand for an inferior
Linear Demand Curve. The diagram depicts the linear demand curve given by equation 2.13.
A rise in the purchasing power (income) of the consumer can sometimes induce the consumer to reduce the consumption of a good.
In such a case, the substitution effect and the income effect will work in opposite directions. The demand for such a good can be inversely or positively related to its price depending on the relative strengths of these two opposing effects. If the substitution effect is stronger than the income effect, the demand for the good and the price of the good would still be inversely related. However, if the income effect is stronger than the substitution effect, the demand for the good would be positively related to its price. Such a good is called a Giffen good.
Reprint 2026-27
