29 Theory of Consumer
Behaviour
Therefore, in our example, as price of bananas increases by 40 percent, demand for bananas drops by 20 percent. Price elasticity of demand = =
Clearly, the demand for bananas is not very responsive to a change in price of bananas. When the percentage change in quantity demanded is less than the percentage change in market price, D e is estimated to be less than one and the demand for the good is said to be inelastic at that price. Demand for essential goods is often found to be inelastic.
When the percentage change in quantity demanded is more than the percentage change in market price, the demand is said to be highly responsive to changes in market price and the estimated D e is more than one. The demand for the good is said to be elastic at that price. Demand for luxury goods is seen to be highly responsive to changes in their market prices and D e >1.
When the percentage change in quantity demanded equals the percentage change in its market price, D e is estimated to be equal to one and the demand for the good is said to be Unitary-elastic at that price. Note that the demand for certain goods may be elastic, unitary elastic and inelastic at different prices. In fact, in the next section, elasticity along a linear demand curve is estimated at different prices and shown to vary at each point on a downward sloping demand
2.6.1 Elasticity along a Linear Demand Curve
Let us consider a linear demand curve q = a – bp. Note that at any point on the demand curve, the change in demand per unit change in the price q
Substituting the value of q
∆ in (2.16b), we obtain, eD = – b p puting the value of q, eD = – – a bp (2.17)
From (2.17), it is clear that the elasticity of demand is different at different points on a linear demand curve. At p = 0, the elasticity is 0, at q =
0, elasticity is ∞. At p = 2 b , the elasticity is 1, at any price greater than 0 and less b , elasticity is less than 1, and at any price greater than 2 b , elasticity is greater than 1. The price elasticities of demand along the linear demand curve given by equation (2.17) are depicted in Figure 2.19.
Elasticity along a Linear Demand
Curve. Price elasticity of demand is different at different points on the linear demand
Reprint 2026-27
Introductory
Microeconomics
Constant Elasticity Demand Curve
The elasticity of demand on different points on a linear demand curve is different varying from 0 to ∞. But sometimes, the demand curves can be such that the elasticity of demand remains constant throughout. Consider, for example, a vertical demand curve as the one depicted in Figure 2.20(a). Whatever be the price, the demand is given at the level q . A price never leads to a change in the demand for such a demand curve and |eD| is always 0. Therefore, a vertical demand curve is perfectly inelastic.
Figure 2.20 (b) depics a horizontal demand curve, where market price remains constant at P , whatever be the level of demand for the commodity. At any other price, quantity demanded drops to zero and therefore d e = ∞ . A horizontal demand curve is perfectly elastic.
Geometric Measure of Elasticity along a Linear Demand Curve
The elasticity of a linear demand curve can easily be measured geometrically. The elasticity of demand at any point on a straight line demand curve is given by the ratio of the lower segment and the upper segment of the demand curve at that point. To see why this is the case, consider the following figure which depicts a straight line demand curve, q = a – bp.
Suppose at price p0, the demand for the good is q0. Now consider a small change in the price. The new price is p1, and at that price, demand for the good is q1.
∆q = q1q0 = CD and ∆p = p1p0 = CE.
Therefore, eD =
Since ECD and Bp0D are similar triangles, CD p B . But
Since, Bp0D and BOA are similar triangles, p B = DA
Thus, eD = DA
The elasticity of demand at different points on a straight line demand curve can be derived by this method. Elasticity is 0 at the point where the demand curve meets the horizontal axis and it is ∝ at the point where the demand curve meets the vertical axis. At the midpoint of the demand curve, the elasticity is 1, at any point to the left of the midpoint, it is greater than 1 and at any point to the right, it is less than 1.
Note that along the horizontal axis p = 0, along the vertical axis q = 0 and at the midpoint of the demand curve p = 2
Reprint 2026-27
