Introductory
Microeconomics
K K K K Key
Concepts ey Concepts ey Concepts ey Concepts ey Concepts
Budget set Budget line
Preference Indifference
Indifference curve Marginal Rate of substitution
Monotonic preferences Diminishing rate of substitution
Indifference map,Utility function Consumer’s optimum
Demand Law of demand
Demand curve Substitution effect
Income effect Normal good
Inferior good Substitute
Complement Price elasticity of demand
1. What do you mean by the budget set of a consumer?
2. What is budget line?
3. Explain why the budget line is downward sloping.
4. A consumer wants to consume two goods. The prices of the two goods are Rs 4 and Rs 5 respectively. The consumer’s income is Rs 20.
(i) Write down the equation of the budget line.
(ii) How much of good 1 can the consumer consume if she spends her entire income on that good?
(iii) How much of good 2 can she consume if she spends her entire income on that good?
(iv) What is the slope of the budget line?
Questions 5, 6 and 7 are related to question 4.
5. How does the budget line change if the consumer’s income increases to Rs 40 but the prices remain unchanged?
6. How does the budget line change if the price of good 2 decreases by a rupee but the price of good 1 and the consumer’s income remain unchanged?
7. What happens to the budget set if both the prices as well as the income double?
8. Suppose a consumer can afford to buy 6 units of good 1 and 8 units of good 2 if she spends her entire income. The prices of the two goods are Rs 6 and Rs 8 respectively. How much is the consumer’s income?
9. Suppose a consumer wants to consume two goods which are available only in integer units. The two goods are equally priced at Rs 10 and the consumer’s income is Rs 40.
(i) Write down all the bundles that are available to the consumer.
(ii) Among the bundles that are available to the consumer, identify those which cost her exactly Rs 40.
10. What do you mean by ‘monotonic preferences’?
11. If a consumer has monotonic preferences, can she be indifferent between the bundles (10, 8) and (8, 6)?
12. Suppose a consumer’s preferences are monotonic. What can you say about her preference ranking over the bundles (10, 10), (10, 9) and (9, 9)?
Exercises Exercises Exercises Exercises Exercises taken together at different levels of the price of the good.
• The price elasticity of demand for a good is defined as the percentage change in demand for the good divided by the percentage change in its price.
• The elasticity of demand is a pure number.
• Elasticity of demand for a good and total expenditure on the good are closely related.
Reprint 2026-27
