24 BIOLOGY not only the external features, but also internal features, like ultra- structure, anatomy, embryology and phytochemistry. Such a classification for flowering plants was given by George Bentham and
Joseph Dalton Hooker.
At present phylogenetic classification systems based on evolutionary relationships between the various organisms are acceptable.
This assumes that organisms belonging to the same taxa have a common ancestor. We now use information from many other sources too to help resolve difficulties in classification. These become more important when there is no supporting fossil evidence. Numerical Taxonomy which is now easily carried out using computers is based on all observable characteristics. Number and codes are assigned to all the characters and the data are then processed. In this way each character is given equal importance and at the same time hundreds of characters can be considered. Cytotaxonomy, that is based on cytological information like chromosome number, structure, behaviour and chemotaxonomy, that uses the chemical constituents of the plant to resolve confusions, are also used by taxonomists these days.
3.1 ALGAE
A lgae are chlorophyll-bearing, simple, thalloid, autotrophic and largely aquatic (both fresh water and marine) organisms. They occur in a variety of other habitats: moist stones, soils and wood. Some of them also occur in association with fungi (lichen) and animals (e.g., on sloth bear).
The form and size of algae is highly variable, ranging from colonial forms like Volvox and the filamentous forms like Ulothrix and Spirogyra (Figure 3.1). A few of the marine forms such as kelps, form massive plant
The algae reproduce by vegetative, asexual and sexual methods.
Vegetative reproduction is by fragmentation. Each fragment develops into a thallus. Asexual reproduction is by the production of different types of spores, the most common being the zoospores. They are flagellated (motile) and on germination gives rise to new plants. Sexual reproduction takes place through fusion of two gametes. These gametes can be flagellated and similar in size (as in Ulothrix) or non-flagellated (non-motile)
but similar in size (as in Spirogyra). Such reproduction is called isogamous. Fusion of two gametes dissimilar in size, as in species of
Eudorina is termed as anisogamous. Fusion between one large, non- motile (static) female gamete and a smaller, motile male gamete is termed oogamous, e.g., Volvox, Fucus.
Reprint 2026-27
PLANT KINGDOM 25
Figure 3.1 Algae : (a) Green algae (i) Volvox (ii) Ulothrix (b) Brown algae (i) Laminaria (ii) Fucus (iii) Dictyota (c) Red algae (i) Porphyra (ii) Polysiphonia
Reprint 2026-27
26 BIOLOGY
Algae are useful to man in a variety of ways. At least a half of the total carbon dioxide fixation on earth is carried out by algae through photosynthesis. Being photosynthetic, they increase the level of dissolved oxygen in their immediate environment. They are of paramount importance as primary producers of energy-rich compounds which form the basis of the food cycles of all aquatic animals. Many species of Porphyra,
Laminaria and Sargassum are among the 70 species of marine algae used as food. Certain marine brown and red algae produce large amounts of hydrocolloids (water holding substances), e.g., algin (brown algae) and carrageen (red algae) which are used commercially. Agar, one of the commercial products obtained from Gelidium and Gracilaria are used to grow microbes and in preparations of ice-creams and jellies. Chlorella, a unicellular alga rich in proteins, is used as food supplement even by space travellers. The algae are divided into three main classes:
Chlorophyceae, Phaeophyceae and Rhodophyceae.
3.1.1 Chlorophyceae
The members of chlorophyceae are commonly called green algae. The plant body may be unicellular, colonial or filamentous. They are usually grass green due to the dominance of pigments chlorophyll a and b. The pigments are localised in definite chloroplasts. The chloroplasts may be discoid, plate-like, reticulate, cup-shaped, spiral or ribbon-shaped in different species. Most of the members have one or more storage bodies called pyrenoids located in the chloroplasts. Pyrenoids contain protein besides starch. Some algae may store food in the form of oil droplets.
Green algae usually have a rigid cell wall made of an inner layer of cellulose and an outer layer of pectose.
Vegetative reproduction usually takes place by fragmentation.
A sexual reproduction is by flagellated zoospores produced in zoosporangia. The sexual reproduction shows considerable variation in the type and formation of sex cells and it may be isogamous, anisogamous or oogamous. Some commonly found green algae are:
Chlamydomonas, Volvox, Ulothrix, Spirogyra and Chara (Figure 3.1a).
3.1.2 Phaeophyceae
The members of phaeophyceae or brown algae are found primarily in marine habitats. They show great variation in size and form. They range from simple branched, filamentous forms (Ectocarpus) to profusely branched forms as represented by kelps, which may reach a height of
100 metres. They possess chlorophyll a, c, carotenoids and xanthophylls.
They vary in colour from olive green to various shades of brown depending upon the amount of the xanthophyll pigment, fucoxanthin present in
Reprint 2026-27
PLANT KINGDOM 27 them. Food is stored as complex carbohydrates, which may be in the form of laminarin or mannitol. The vegetative cells have a cellulosic wall usually covered on the outside by a gelatinous coating of algin. The protoplast contains, in addition to plastids, a centrally located vacuole and nucleus. The plant body is usually attached to the substratum by a holdfast, and has a stalk, the stipe and leaf like photosynthetic organ – the frond. Vegetative reproduction takes place by fragmentation. Asexual reproduction in most brown algae is by biflagellate zoospores that are pear-shaped and have two unequal laterally attached flagella.
Sexual reproduction may be isogamous, anisogamous or oogamous.
Union of gametes may take place in water or within the oogonium (oogamous species). The gametes are pyriform (pear-shaped) and bear two laterally attached flagella. The common forms are Ectocarpus, Dictyota,
Laminaria, Sargassum and Fucus (Figure 3.1b).
3.1.3 Rhodophyceae
The members of rhodophyceae are commonly called red algae because of the predominance of the red pigment, r-phycoerythrin in their body. Majority of the red algae are marine with greater concentrations found in the warmer areas. They occur in both well-lighted regions close to the surface of water and also at great depths in oceans where relatively little light penetrates.
The red thalli of most of the red algae are multicellular. Some of them have complex body organisation. The food is stored as floridean starch which is very similar to amylopectin and glycogen in structure.
The red algae usually reproduce vegetatively by fragmentation. They reproduce asexually by non-motile spores and sexually by non-motile
TABLE 3.1 Divisions of Algae and their Main Characteristics
Classes Common Major Stored Cell Wall Flagellar Habitat
Name Pigments Food Number and
Position of
Insertions
Chlorophyceae Green Chlorophyll Starch Cellulose 2-8, equal, Fresh water, algae a, b apical brackish water, salt water
Phaeophyceae Brown Chlorophyll Mannitol, Cellulose 2, unequal, Fresh water algae a, c, laminarin and algin lateral (rare), brackish fucoxanthin water, salt
Rhodophyceae Red Chlorophyll Floridean Cellulose, Absent Fresh water algae a, d, starch pectin and (some), phycoerythrin poly brackish sulphate water, salt esters water (most)
Reprint 2026-27
28 BIOLOGY gametes. Sexual reproduction is oogamous and accompanied by complex post fertilisation developments. The common members are: Polysiphonia,
Porphyra (Figure 3.1c), Gracilaria and Gelidium.
3.2 BRYOPHYTES
Bryophytes include the various mosses and liverworts that are found commonly growing in moist shaded areas in the hills (Figure 3.2).
Archegoniophore
Antheridiophore
Antheridial branch Branches
Archegonial
Sporophyte
Gametophyte
Main axis
Rhizoids
Gemma cup
Rhizoids
Gemma cup
Rhizoids
Figure 3.2 Bryophytes: A liverwort – Marchantia (a) Female thallus (b) Male thallus
Mosses – (c) Funaria, gametophyte and sporophyte (d) Sphagnum gametophyte
Reprint 2026-27
PLANT KINGDOM 29
Bryophytes are also called amphibians of the plant kingdom because these plants can live in soil but are dependent on water for sexual reproduction. They usually occur in damp, humid and shaded localities.
They play an important role in plant succession on bare rocks/soil.
The plant body of bryophytes is more differentiated than that of algae.
It is thallus-like and prostrate or erect, and attached to the substratum by unicellular or multicellular rhizoids. They lack true roots, stem or leaves. They may possess root-like, leaf-like or stem-like structures. The main plant body of the bryophyte is haploid. It produces gametes, hence is called a gametophyte. The sex organs in bryophytes are multicellular.
The male sex organ is called antheridium. They produce biflagellate antherozoids. The female sex organ called archegonium is flask-shaped and produces a single egg. The antherozoids are released into water where they come in contact with archegonium. An antherozoid fuses with the egg to produce the zygote. Zygotes do not undergo reduction division immediately. They produce a multicellular body called a sporophyte.
The sporophyte is not free-living but attached to the photosynthetic gametophyte and derives nourishment from it. Some cells of the sporophyte undergo reduction division (meiosis) to produce haploid spores. These spores germinate to produce gametophyte.
Bryophytes in general are of little economic importance but some mosses provide food for herbaceous mammals, birds and other animals.
Species of Sphagnum, a moss, provide peat that have long been used as fuel, and as packing material for trans-shipment of living material because of their capacity to hold water. Mosses along with lichens are the first organisms to colonise rocks and hence, are of great ecological importance.
They decompose rocks making the substrate suitable for the growth of higher plants. Since mosses form dense mats on the soil, they reduce the impact of falling rain and prevent soil erosion. The bryophytes are divided into liverworts and mosses.
3.2.1 Liverworts
The liverworts grow usually in moist, shady habitats such as banks of streams, marshy ground, damp soil, bark of trees and deep in the woods.
The plant body of a liverwort is thalloid, e.g., Marchantia. The thallus is dorsiventral and closely appressed to the substrate. The leafy members have tiny leaf-like appendages in two rows on the stem-like structures.
Asexual reproduction in liverworts takes place by fragmentation of thalli, or by the formation of specialised structures called gemmae (sing. gemma). Gemmae are green, multicellular, asexual buds, which develop in small receptacles called gemma cups located on the thalli.
The gemmae become detached from the parent body and germinate to form new individuals. During sexual reproduction, male and female sex
Reprint 2026-27
30 BIOLOGY organs are produced either on the same or on different thalli. The sporophyte is differentiated into a foot, seta and capsule. After meiosis, spores are produced within the capsule. These spores germinate to form free-living gametophytes.
3.2.2 Mosses
The predominant stage of the life cycle of a moss is the gametophyte which consists of two stages. The first stage is the protonema stage, which develops directly from a spore. It is a creeping, green, branched and frequently filamentous stage. The second stage is the leafy stage, which develops from the secondary protonema as a lateral bud. They consist of upright, slender axes bearing spirally arranged leaves. They are attached to the soil through multicellular and branched rhizoids. This stage bears the sex organs.
Vegetative reproduction in mosses is by fragmentation and budding in the secondary protonema. In sexual reproduction, the sex organs antheridia and archegonia are produced at the apex of the leafy shoots.
After fertilisation, the zygote develops into a sporophyte, consisting of a foot, seta and capsule. The sporophyte in mosses is more elaborate than that in liverworts. The capsule contains spores. Spores are formed after meiosis. The mosses have an elaborate mechanism of spore dispersal.
Common examples of mosses are Funaria, Polytrichum and Sphagnum (Figure 3.2).
3.3 PTERIDOPHYTES
The Pteridophytes include horsetails and ferns. Pteridophytes are used for medicinal purposes and as soil-binders. They are also frequently grown as ornamentals. Evolutionarily, they are the first terrestrial plants to possess vascular tissues – xylem and phloem. You shall study more about these tissues in Chapter 6. The pteridophytes are found in cool, damp, shady places though some may flourish well in sandy-soil conditions.
You may recall that in bryophytes the dominant phase in the life cycle is the gametophytic plant body. However, in pteridophytes, the main plant body is a sporophyte which is differentiated into true root, stem and leaves (Figure 3.3). These organs possess well-differentiated vascular tissues. The leaves in pteridophyta are small (microphylls) as in Selaginella or large (macrophylls) as in ferns. The sporophytes bear sporangia that are subtended by leaf-like appendages called sporophylls. In some cases sporophylls may form distinct compact structures called strobili or cones (Selaginella, Equisetum). The sporangia produce spores by meiosis in spore mother cells. The spores germinate to give rise to inconspicuous, small but multicellular,
Reprint 2026-27
