40 BIOLOGY
The important characteristic features of the different phyla are described.
4.2.1 Phylum – Porifera
Members of this phylum are commonly known as sponges. They are generally marine and mostly asymmetrical animals (Figure 4.5). These are primitive multicellular animals and have cellular level of organisation. Sponges have a water transport or canal system. Water enters through minute pores (ostia) in the body wall into a central cavity, spongocoel, from where it goes out through the osculum. This pathway of water transport is helpful in food gathering, respiratory exchange and removal of waste. Choanocytes or collar cells line the spongocoel and the canals.
Digestion is intracellular. The body is supported by a skeleton made up of spicules or spongin fibres. Sexes are not separate (hermaphrodite), i.e., eggs and sperms are produced by the same individual. Sponges reproduce asexually by fragmentation and sexually by formation of gametes. Fertilisation is internal and development is indirect having a larval stage which is morphologically distinct from the adult.
*Echinodermata exhibits radial or bilateral symmetry depending on the stage.
Figure 4.4 Broad classification of Kingdom Animalia based on common fundamental features
Figure 4.5 Examples of Porifera : (a) Sycon (b) Euspongia (c) Spongilla
Reprint 2026-27
ANIMAL KINGDOM 41 41 cnidoblasts or cnidocytes (which contain the stinging capsules or nematocysts) present on the tentacles and the body. Cnidoblasts are used for anchorage, defense and for the capture of prey (Figure 4.7). Cnidarians exhibit tissue level of organisation and are diploblastic. They have a central gastro-vascular cavity with a single opening, mouth on hypostome.
Digestion is extracellular and intracellular. Some of the cnidarians, e.g., corals have a skeleton composed of calcium carbonate. Cnidarians exhibit two basic body forms called polyp and medusa (Figure 4.6). The former is a sessile and cylindrical form like Hydra, Adamsia, etc. whereas, the latter is umbrella-shaped and free-swimming like Aurelia or jelly fish.
Those cnidarians which exist in both forms exhibit alternation of generations (Metagenesis), i.e., polyps produce medusae asexually and medusae form the polyps sexually (e.g., Obelia).
Examples: Physalia (Portuguese man-of-war), Adamsia (Sea anemone),
Pennatula (Sea-pen), Gorgonia (Sea-fan) and Meandrina (Brain coral).
Figure 4.7
Diagrammatic view of
Cnidoblast
Figure 4.6 Examples of Coelenterata indicating outline of their body form :
(a) Aurelia (Medusa) (b) Adamsia (Polyp)
Examples: Sycon (Scypha), Spongilla (Fresh water sponge) and Euspongia (Bath sponge).
4.2.2 Phylum – Coelenterata (Cnidaria)
They are aquatic, mostly marine, sessile or free-swimming, radially symmetrical animals (Figure 4.6). The name cnidaria is derived from the
Reprint 2026-27
42 BIOLOGY
4.2.3 Phylum – Ctenophora
Ctenophores, commonly known as sea walnuts or comb jellies are exclusively marine, radially symmetrical, diploblastic organisms with tissue level of organisation. The body bears eight external rows of ciliated comb plates, which help in locomotion (Figure 4.8). Digestion is both extracellular and intracellular. Bioluminescence (the property of a living organism to emit light) is well-marked in ctenophores. Sexes are not separate. Reproduction takes place only by sexual means. Fertilisation is external with indirect development.
Examples: Pleurobrachia and Ctenoplana.
4.2.4 Phylum – Platyhelminthes
They have dorso-ventrally flattened body, hence are called flatworms (Figure 4.9). These are mostly endoparasites found in animals including human beings. Flatworms are bilaterally symmetrical, triploblastic and acoelomate animals with organ level of organisation. Hooks and suckers are present in the parasitic forms. Some of them absorb nutrients from the host directly through their body surface. Specialised cells called flame cells help in osmoregulation and excretion. Sexes are not separate. Fertilisation is internal and development is through many larval stages. Some members like Planaria possess high regeneration capacity.
Examples: Taenia (Tapeworm), Fasciola (Liver fluke).
Figure 4.8 Example of
Ctenophora (Pleurobrachia)
Figure 4.9 Examples of Platyhelminthes : (a) Tape worm (b) Liver fluke
Reprint 2026-27
ANIMAL KINGDOM 43 43
4.2.5 Phylum – Aschelminthes
The body of the aschelminthes is circular in cross-section, hence, the name roundworms (Figure 4.10). They may be freeliving, aquatic and terrestrial or parasitic in plants and animals.
Roundworms have organ-system level of body organisation. They are bilaterally symmetrical, triploblastic and pseudocoelomate animals.
Alimentary canal is complete with a well- developed muscular pharynx. An excretory tube removes body wastes from the body cavity through the excretory pore. Sexes are separate (dioecious), i.e., males and females are distinct.
Often females are longer than males. Fertilisation is internal and development may be direct (the young ones resemble the adult) or indirect.
Examples : Ascaris (Roundworm), Wuchereria (Filaria worm), Ancylostoma (Hookworm).
4.2.6 Phylum – Annelida
They may be aquatic (marine and fresh water) or terrestrial; free-living, and sometimes parasitic.
They exhibit organ-system level of body organisation and bilateral symmetry. They are triploblastic, metamerically segmented and coelomate animals. Their body surface is distinctly marked out into segments or metameres and, hence, the phylum name
Annelida (Latin, annulus : little ring) (Figure 4.11).
They possess longitudinal and circular muscles which help in locomotion. Aquatic annelids like
Nereis possess lateral appendages, parapodia, which help in swimming. A closed circulatory system is present. Nephridia (sing. nephridium)
help in osmoregulation and excretion. Neural system consists of paired ganglia (sing. ganglion)
connected by lateral nerves to a double ventral nerve cord. Nereis, an aquatic form, is dioecious, but earthworms and leeches are monoecious.
Reproduction is sexual.
Examples : Nereis, Pheretima (Earthworm) and
Hirudinaria (Blood sucking leech).
Figure 4.11 Examples of Annelida : (a) Nereis (b) Hirudinaria
Male Female
Figure 4.10 Example of
Aschelminthes:
Roundworm
Reprint 2026-27
