44 BIOLOGY
4.2.7 Phylum – Arthropoda
This is the largest phylum of Animalia which includes insects. Over two-thirds of all named species on earth are arthropods (Figure 4.12).
They have organ-system level of organisation.
They are bilaterally symmetrical, triploblastic, segmented and coelomate animals. The body of arthropods is covered by chitinous exoskeleton. The body consists of head, thorax and abdomen. They have jointed appendages (arthros-joint, poda-appendages). Respiratory organs are gills, book gills, book lungs or tracheal system. Circulatory system is of open type. Sensory organs like antennae, eyes (compound and simple), statocysts or balancing organs are present. Excretion takes place through malpighian tubules. They are mostly dioecious. Fertilisation is usually internal. They are mostly oviparous.
Development may be direct or indirect.
Examples: Economically important insects –
Apis (Honey bee), Bombyx (Silkworm), Laccifer (Lac insect)
Vectors – Anopheles, Culex and Aedes (Mosquitoes)
Gregarious pest – Locusta (Locust)
Living fossil – Limulus (King crab).
4.2.8 Phylum – Mollusca
This is the second largest animal phylum (Figure 4.13). Molluscs are terrestrial or aquatic (marine or fresh water) having an organ-system level of organisation. They are bilaterally symmetrical, triploblastic and coelomate animals. Body is covered by a calcareous shell and is unsegmented with a distinct head, muscular foot and visceral hump. A soft and spongy layer of skin forms a mantle over the visceral hump. The space between the hump and the mantle is called the mantle cavity in which feather like gills are present. They have respiratory and excretory functions. The anterior head region has sensory tentacles. The mouth contains a file-like rasping organ for feeding, called radula.
Figure 4.12 Examples of Arthropoda :
(a) Locust (b) Butterfly (c) Scorpion (d) Prawn
Figure 4.13 Examples of Mollusca :
(a) Pila (b) Octopus
Reprint 2026-27
ANIMAL KINGDOM 45 45
They are usually dioecious and oviparous with indirect development.
Examples: Pila (Apple snail), Pinctada (Pearl oyster), Sepia (Cuttlefish), Loligo (Squid), Octopus (Devil fish), Aplysia (Sea- hare), Dentalium (Tusk shell) and Chaetopleura (Chiton).
4.2.9 Phylum – Echinodermata
These animals have an endoskeleton of calcareous ossicles and, hence, the name Echinodermata (Spiny bodied, Figure
4.14). All are marine with organ-system level of organisation.
The adult echinoderms are radially symmetrical but larvae are bilaterally symmetrical. They are triploblastic and coelomate animals. Digestive system is complete with mouth on the lower (ventral) side and anus on the upper (dorsal)
side. The most distinctive feature of echinoderms is the presence of water vascular system which helps in locomotion, capture and transport of food and respiration.
An excretory system is absent. Sexes are separate.
Reproduction is sexual. Fertilisation is usually external.
Development is indirect with free-swimming larva.
Examples: Asterias (Star fish), Echinus (Sea urchin), Antedon (Sea lily), Cucumaria (Sea cucumber) and Ophiura (Brittle star).
4.2.10 Phylum – Hemichordata
Hemichordata was earlier considered as a sub-phylum under phylum Chordata. But now it is placed as a separate phylum under non-chordata. Hemichordates have a rudimentary structure in the collar region called stomochord, a structure similar to notochord.
This phylum consists of a small group of worm-like marine animals with organ-system level of organisation. They are bilaterally symmetrical, triploblastic and coelomate animals. The body is cylindrical and is composed of an anterior proboscis, a collar and a long trunk (Figure 4.15).
Circulatory system is of open type. Respiration takes place through gills. Excretory organ is proboscis gland. Sexes are separate. Fertilisation is external. Development is indirect.
Examples: Balanoglossus and Saccoglossus.
4.2.11 Phylum – Chordata
Animals belonging to phylum Chordata are fundamentally characterised by the presence of a notochord, a dorsal
Figure 4.14 Examples of
Echinodermata :
(a) Asterias (b) Ophiura
Figure 4.15 Balanoglossus
Proboscis
Reprint 2026-27
46 BIOLOGY hollow nerve cord and paired pharyngeal gill slits (Figure 4.16). These are bilaterally symmetrical, triploblastic, coelomate with organ-system level of organisation. They possess a post anal tail and a closed circulatory
Table 4.1 presents a comparison of salient features of chordates and non-chordates.
Phylum Chordata is divided into three subphyla: U r o c h o r d a t a or Tunicata,
Cephalochordata and Vertebrata.
Subphyla Urochordata and
Cephalochordata are often referred to as protochordates (Figure 4.17) and are exclusively marine. In Urochordata, notochord is present only in larval tail, while in
Cephalochordata, it extends from head to tail region and is persistent throughout their life.
Examples: Urochordata – Ascidia, Salpa,
Doliolum; Cephalochordata – Branchiostoma (Amphioxus or Lancelet).
The members of subphylum Vertebrata possess notochord during the embryonic period. The notochord is replaced by a cartilaginous or bony vertebral column in the adult. Thus all vertebrates are chordates but all chordates are not vertebrates. Besides the basic chordate characters, vertebrates have a ventral muscular heart with two, three or four chambers, kidneys for excretion and osmoregulation and paired appendages which may be fins or limbs.
Nerve cord Notochord
Post-anal part
Gill slits
Figure 4.16 Chordata characteristics
Figure 4.17 Ascidia
TABLE 4.1 Comparison of Chordates and Non-chordates
S.No. Chordates Non-chordates
1. Notochord present. Notochord absent.
2. Central nervous system is dorsal, Central nervous system is ventral, solid hollow and single. and double.
3. Pharynx perforated by gill slits. Gill slits are absent.
4. Heart is ventral. Heart is dorsal (if present).
5. A post-anal part (tail) is present. Post-anal tail is absent.
Reprint 2026-27
ANIMAL KINGDOM 47 47
4.2.11.1 4.2.11.1 4.2.11.1 4.2.11.1 4.2.11.1 Class – Cyclostomata Class – Cyclostomata Class – Cyclostomata Class – Cyclostomata Class – Cyclostomata
All living members of the class Cyclostomata are ectoparasites on some fishes. They have an elongated body bearing 6-15 pairs of gill slits for respiration. Cyclostomes have a sucking and circular mouth without jaws (Fig. 4.18). Their body is devoid of scales and paired fins.
Cranium and vertebral column are cartilaginous. Circulation is of closed type.
Cyclostomes are marine but migrate for spawning to fresh water. After spawning, within a few days, they die. Their larvae, after metamorphosis, return to the ocean.
Examples: Petromyzon (Lamprey) and Myxine (Hagfish).
4.2.11.2 4.2.11.2 4.2.11.2 4.2.11.2 4.2.11.2 Class – Chondrichthyes Class – Chondrichthyes Class – Chondrichthyes Class – Chondrichthyes Class – Chondrichthyes
They are marine animals with streamlined body and have cartilaginous endoskeleton (Figure 4.19). Mouth is located ventrally.
Notochord is persistent throughout life. Gill slits are separate and without operculum (gill cover). The skin is tough, containing minute placoid scales. Teeth are modified placoid scales which are backwardly directed. Their jaws are very powerful. These animals are predaceous. Due to the absence of air bladder, they have to swim constantly to avoid sinking.
Vertebrata
Division (lacks jaw)
1. Cyclostomata
Gnathostomata (bears jaw)
Super Class (bear fins)
Tetrapoda (bear limbs)
1. Amphibia
2. Reptilia
4. Mammals
1. Chondrichthyes
2. Osteichthyes
The subphylum Vertebrata is further divided as follows:
Figure 4.18 A jawless vertebrate - Petromyzon
Figure 4.19 Example of Cartilaginous fishes :
(a) Scoliodon (b) Pristis
Reprint 2026-27
48 BIOLOGY
Heart is two-chambered (one auricle and one ventricle).
Some of them have electric organs (e.g., Torpedo) and some possess poison sting (e.g., Trygon). They are cold-blooded (poikilothermous) animals, i.e., they lack the capacity to regulate their body temperature. Sexes are separate. In males pelvic fins bear claspers. They have internal fertilisation and many of them are viviparous.
Examples: Scoliodon (Dog fish), Pristis (Saw fish),
Carcharodon (Great white shark), Trygon (Sting ray).
4.2.11.3 4.2.11.3 4.2.11.3 4.2.11.3 4.2.11.3 Class – Osteichthyes Class – Osteichthyes Class – Osteichthyes Class – Osteichthyes Class – Osteichthyes
It includes both marine and fresh water fishes with bony endoskeleton. Their body is streamlined. Mouth is mostly terminal (Figure 4.20). They have four pairs of gills which are covered by an operculum on each side.
Skin is covered with cycloid/ctenoid scales. Air bladder is present which regulates buoyancy. Heart is two- chambered (one auricle and one ventricle). They are cold-blooded animals. Sexes are separate. Fertilisation is usually external. They are mostly oviparous and development is direct.
Examples: Marine – E x o c o e t u s (Flying fish),
Hippocampus (Sea horse); Freshwater – Labeo (Rohu),
Catla (Katla), Clarias (Magur); Aquarium – Betta (Fighting fish), Pterophyllum (Angel fish).
4.2.11.4 4.2.11.4 4.2.11.4 4.2.11.4 4.2.11.4 Class – Amphibia Class – Amphibia Class – Amphibia Class – Amphibia Class – Amphibia
As the name indicates (Gr., Amphi : dual, bios, life), amphibians can live in aquatic as well as terrestrial habitats (Figure 4.21). Most of them have two pairs of limbs. Body is divisible into head and trunk. Tail may be present in some. The amphibian skin is moist (without scales). The eyes have eyelids. A tympanum represents the ear. Alimentary canal, urinary and reproductive tracts open into a common chamber called cloaca which opens to the exterior. Respiration is by gills, lungs and through skin. The heart is three- chambered (two auricles and one ventricle). These are cold-blooded animals. Sexes are separate. Fertilisation is external. They are oviparous and development is indirect.
Examples: Bufo (Toad), Rana (Frog), Hyla (Tree frog),
Salamandra (Salamander), Ichthyophis (Limbless amphibia).
Figure 4.21 Examples of Amphibia :
(a) Salamandra (b) Rana
Figure 4.20 Examples of Bony fishes :
(a) Hippocampus (b) Catla
Reprint 2026-27
ANIMAL KINGDOM 49 49
4.2.11.5 4.2.11.5 4.2.11.5 4.2.11.5 4.2.11.5 Class – Reptilia Class – Reptilia Class – Reptilia Class – Reptilia Class – Reptilia
The class name refers to their creeping or crawling mode of locomotion (Latin, repere or reptum, to creep or crawl). They are mostly terrestrial animals and their body is covered by dry and cornified skin, epidermal scales or scutes (Fig. 4.22). They do not have external ear openings.
Tympanum represents ear. Limbs, when present, are two pairs. Heart is usually three-chambered, but four-chambered in crocodiles. Reptiles are poikilotherms. Snakes and lizards shed their scales as skin cast. Sexes are separate. Fertilisation is internal. They are oviparous and development is direct.
Examples: Chelone (Turtle), Testudo (Tortoise), Chameleon (Tree lizard),
Calotes (Garden lizard), Crocodilus (Crocodile), Alligator (Alligator).
Hemidactylus (Wall lizard), Poisonous snakes – Naja (Cobra), Bangarus (Krait), Vipera (Viper).
4.2.11.6 4.2.11.6 4.2.11.6 4.2.11.6 4.2.11.6 Class – Aves Class – Aves Class – Aves Class – Aves Class – Aves
The characteristic features of Aves (birds) are the presence of feathers and most of them can fly except flightless birds (e.g., Ostrich). They possess beak (Figure 4.23). The forelimbs are modified into wings. The hind limbs generally have scales and are modified for walking, swimming or clasping the tree branches. Skin is dry without glands except the oil gland at the base of the tail. Endoskeleton is fully ossified (bony) and the long bones are hollow with air cavities (pneumatic). The digestive tract of birds has additional chambers, the crop and gizzard. Heart is completely four- chambered. They are warm-blooded (homoiothermous) animals, i.e., they are able to maintain a constant body temperature. Respiration is by
Figure 4.22 Reptiles: (a) Chameleon (b) Crocodilus (c) Chelone (d) Naja (b) (c) (a) (d)
Reprint 2026-27
50 BIOLOGY lungs. Air sacs connected to lungs supplement respiration. Sexes are separate. Fertilisation is internal. They are oviparous and development is
Examples : Corvus (Crow), Columba (Pigeon), Psittacula (Parrot), Struthio (Ostrich), Pavo (Peacock), Aptenodytes (Penguin), Neophron (Vulture).
4.2.11.7 4.2.11.7 4.2.11.7 4.2.11.7 4.2.11.7 Class – Mammalia Class – Mammalia Class – Mammalia Class – Mammalia Class – Mammalia
They are found in a variety of habitats – polar ice caps, deserts, mountains, forests, grasslands and dark caves. Some of them have adapted to fly or live in water. The most unique mammalian characteristic is the presence of milk producing glands (mammary glands) by which the young ones are nourished. They have two pairs of limbs, adapted for walking, running, climbing, burrowing, swimming or flying (Figure 4.24). The skin of
Figure 4.23 Some birds : (a) Neophron (b) Struthio (c) Psittacula (d) Pavo (b) (c) (d)
Figure 4.24 Some mammals : (a) Ornithorhynchus (b) Macropus (c) Pteropus (d) Balaenoptera
Reprint 2026-27
ANIMAL KINGDOM 51 51 mammals is unique in possessing hair. External ears or pinnae are present. Different types of teeth are present in the jaw. Heart is four- chambered. They are homoiothermous. Respiration is by lungs. Sexes are separate and fertilisation is internal. They are viviparous with few exceptions and development is direct.
Examples: Oviparous-O rnithorhynchus (Platypus); Viviparous -
Macropus (Kangaroo), Pteropus (Flying fox), Camelus (Camel), Macaca (Monkey), Rattus (Rat), Canis (Dog), Felis (Cat), Elephas (Elephant),
Equus (Horse), Delphinus (Common dolphin), Balaenoptera (Blue whale),
Panthera tigris (Tiger), Panthera leo (Lion).
The salient distinguishing features of all phyla under animal kingdom is comprehensively given in the Table 4.2.
Level of
Cellular
Bilateral
Digestive
Incomplete
Complete
Distinctive
Features
Body with pores and canals in walls.
Cnidoblasts present.
Comb plates for locomotion.
Flat body, suckers.
Often worm- elongated.
Body segment- ation like rings.
Exoskeleton of cu- ticle, jointed ap- pendages.
External skeleton of shell usually present.
Water vascular system, radial symmetry.
Wor m-like with proboscis, collar and trunk.
Notochord, dorsal hollow nerve cord, gill slits with limbs or fins.
Porifera
Coelenterata (Cnidaria)
Ctenophora
Platyhelm-
Aschelmin-
Annelida
Arthropoda
Mollusca chordata
Chordata
TABLE 4.2 Salient Features of Different Phyla in the Animal Kingdom
Reprint 2026-27
52 BIOLOGY
The basic fundamental features such as level of organisation, symmetry, cell organisation, coelom, segmentation, notochord, etc., have enabled us to broadly classify the animal kingdom. Besides the fundamental features, there are many other distinctive characters which are specific for each phyla or class.
Porifera includes multicellular animals which exhibit cellular level of organisation and have characteristic flagellated choanocytes. The coelenterates have tentacles and bear cnidoblasts. They are mostly aquatic, sessile or free-floating. The ctenophores are marine animals with comb plates. The platyhelminths have flat body and exhibit bilateral symmetry.
The parasitic forms show distinct suckers and hooks. Aschelminthes are pseudocoelomates and include parasitic as well as non-parasitic roundworms.
Annelids are metamerically segmented animals with a true coelom.
The arthropods are the most abundant group of animals characterised by the presence of jointed appendages. The molluscs have a soft body surrounded by an external calcareous shell. The body is covered with external skeleton made of chitin. The echinoderms possess a spiny skin.
Their most distinctive feature is the presence of water vascular system.
The hemichordates are a small group of worm-like marine animals. They have a cylindrical body with proboscis, collar and trunk.
Phylum Chordata includes animals which possess a notochord either throughout or during early embryonic life. Other common features observed in the chordates are the dorsal, hollow nerve cord and paired pharyngeal gill slits. Some of the vertebrates do not possess jaws (Agnatha)
whereas most of them possess jaws (Gnathostomata). Agnatha is represented by the class, Cyclostomata. They are the most primitive chordates and are ectoparasites on fishes. Gnathostomata has two super classes, Pisces and Tetrapoda. Classes Chondrichthyes and Osteichthyes bear fins for locomotion and are grouped under Pisces. The
Chondrichthyes are fishes with cartilaginous endoskeleton and are marine.
Classes, Amphibia, Reptilia, Aves and Mammalia have two pairs of limbs and are thus grouped under Tetrapoda. The amphibians have adapted to live both on land and water. Reptiles are characterised by the presence
Reprint 2026-27
ANIMAL KINGDOM 53 53 of dry and cornified skin. Limbs are absent in snakes. Fishes, amphibians and reptiles are poikilothermous (cold-blooded). Aves are warm-blooded animals with feathers on their bodies and forelimbs modified into wings for flying. Hind limbs are adapted for walking, swimming, perching or clasping. The unique features of mammals are the presence of mammary glands and hairs on the skin. They commonly exhibit viviparity.
EXERCISES
1. What are the difficulties that you would face in classification of animals, if common fundamental features are not taken into account?
2. If you are given a specimen, what are the steps that you would follow to classify it?
3. How useful is the study of the nature of body cavity and coelom in the classification of animals?
4. Distinguish between intracellular and extracellular digestion?
5. What is the difference between direct and indirect development?
6. What are the peculiar features that you find in parasitic platyhelminthes?
7. What are the reasons that you can think of for the arthropods to constitute the largest group of the animal kingdom?
8. Water
