154 BIOLOGY directly (herbivores) or indirectly (carnivores). Saprophytes like fungi are dependent on dead and decaying matter. What is important to recognise is that ultimately all the food that is respired for life processes comes from photosynthesis. This chapter deals with cellular respiration or the mechanism of breakdown of food materials within the cell to release energy, and the trapping of this energy for synthesis of ATP.
Photosynthesis, of course, takes place within the chloroplasts (in the eukaryotes), whereas the breakdown of complex molecules to yield energy takes place in the cytoplasm and in the mitochondria (also only in eukaryotes). The breaking of the C-C bonds of complex compounds through oxidation within the cells, leading to release of considerable amount of energy is called respiration. The compounds that are oxidised during this process are known as respiratory substrates. Usually carbohydrates are oxidised to release energy, but proteins, fats and even organic acids can be used as respiratory substances in some plants, under certain conditions. During oxidation within a cell, all the energy contained in respiratory substrates is not released free into the cell, or in a single step. It is released in a series of slow step-wise reactions controlled by enzymes, and it is trapped as chemical energy in the form of ATP. Hence, it is important to understand that the energy released by oxidation in respiration is not (or rather cannot be) used directly but is used to synthesise ATP, which is broken down whenever (and wherever) energy needs to be utilised. Hence, ATP acts as the energy currency of the cell.
This energy trapped in ATP is utilised in various energy-requiring processes of the organisms, and the carbon skeleton produced during respiration is used as precursors for biosynthesis of other molecules in the cell.
12.1 DO PLANTS BREATHE?
Well, the answer to this question is not quite so direct. Yes, plants require
O2 for respiration to occur and they also give out CO2. Hence, plants have systems in place that ensure the availability of O2. Plants, unlike animals, have no specialised organs for gaseous exchange but they have stomata and lenticels for this purpose. There are several reasons why plants can get along without respiratory organs. First, each plant part takes care of its own gas-exchange needs. There is very little transport of gases from one plant part to another. Second, plants do not present great demands for gas exchange. Roots, stems and leaves respire at rates far lower than animals do. Only during photosynthesis are large volumes of gases exchanged and, each leaf is well adapted to take care of its own needs during these periods. When cells photosynthesise, availability of O2 is not a problem in these cells since O2 is released within the cell. Third, the
Reprint 2026-27
RESPIRATION IN PLANTS 155 distance that gases must diffuse even in large, bulky plants is not great.
Each living cell in a plant is located quite close to the surface of the plant.
‘This is true for leaves’, you may ask, ‘but what about thick, woody stems and roots?’ In stems, the ‘living’ cells are organised in thin layers inside and beneath the bark. They also have openings called lenticels. The cells in the interior are dead and provide only mechanical support. Thus, most cells of a plant have at least a part of their surface in contact with air. This is also facilitated by the loose packing of parenchyma cells in leaves, stems and roots, which provide an interconnected network of air spaces.
The complete combustion of glucose, which produces CO2 and H2O as end products, yields energy most of which is given out as heat.
C H O O CO H O Energy 6 12 6 2 2 2 6 6 6 +  →  + +
If this energy is to be useful to the cell, it should be able to utilise it to synthesise other molecules that the cell requires. The strategy that the plant cell uses is to catabolise the glucose molecule in such a way that not all the liberated energy goes out as heat. The key is to oxidise glucose not in one step but in several small steps enabling some steps to be just large enough such that the energy released can be coupled to ATP synthesis. How this is done is, essentially, the story of respiration.
During the process of respiration, oxygen is utilised, and carbon dioxide, water and energy are released as products. The combustion reaction requires oxygen. But some cells live where oxygen may or may not be available. Can you think of such situations (and organisms) where
O2 is not available? There are sufficient reasons to believe that the first cells on this planet lived in an atmosphere that lacked oxygen. Even among present-day living organisms, we know of several that are adapted to anaerobic conditions. Some of these organisms are facultative anaerobes, while in others the requirement for anaerobic condition is obligate. In any case, all living organisms retain the enzymatic machinery to partially oxidise glucose without the help of oxygen. This breakdown of glucose to pyruvic acid is called glycolysis.
12.2 GLYCOLYSIS
The term glycolysis has originated from the Greek words, glycos for sugar, and lysis for splitting. The scheme of glycolysis was given by Gustav
Embden, Otto Meyerhof, and J. Parnas, and is often referred to as the
EMP pathway. In anaerobic organisms, it is the only process in respiration.
Glycolysis occurs in the cytoplasm of the cell and is present in all living organisms. In this process, glucose undergoes partial oxidation to form two molecules of pyruvic acid. In plants, this glucose is derived from sucrose, which is the end product of photosynthesis, or from storage
Reprint 2026-27
156 BIOLOGY carbohydrates. Sucrose is converted into glucose and fructose by the enzyme, invertase, and these two monosaccharides readily enter the glycolytic pathway. Glucose and fructose are phosphorylated to give rise to glucose-6- phosphate by the activity of the enzyme hexokinase. This phosphorylated form of glucose then isomerises to produce fructose-6- phosphate. Subsequent steps of metabolism of glucose and fructose are same. The various steps of glycolysis are depicted in Figure 12.1.
In glycolysis, a chain of ten reactions, under the control of different enzymes, takes place to produce pyruvate from glucose. While studying the steps of glycolysis, please note the steps at which utilisation or synthesis of ATP or (in this case) NADH + H+ take place.
ATP is utilised at two steps: first in the conversion of glucose into glucose 6-phosphate and second in the conversion of fructose
6-phosphate to fructose 1, 6-bisphosphate.
The fructose 1, 6-bisphosphate is split into dihydroxyacetone phosphate and
3-phosphoglyceraldehyde (PGAL). We find that there is one step where NADH + H+ is formed from NAD+ ; this is when
3-phosphoglyceraldehyde (PGAL) is converted to 1, 3-bisphosphoglycerate (BPGA). Two redox-equivalents are removed (in the form of two hydrogen atoms) from PGAL and transferred to a molecule of NAD+. PGAL is oxidised and with inorganic phosphate to get converted into
BPGA. The conversion of BPGA to
3-phosphoglyceric acid (PGA), is also an energy yielding process; this energy is trapped by the formation of ATP. Another ATP is synthesised during the conversion of PEP to pyruvic acid.
Can you then calculate how many ATP Can you then calculate how many ATP Can you then calculate how many ATP Can you then calculate how many ATP Can you then calculate how many ATP molecules are directly synthesised in this molecules are directly synthesised in this molecules are directly synthesised in this molecules are directly synthesised in this molecules are directly synthesised in this pathway from one glucose molecule? pathway from one glucose molecule? pathway from one glucose molecule? pathway from one glucose molecule? pathway from one glucose molecule?
Pyruvic acid is then the key product of glycolysis. What is the metabolic fate of pyruvate? This depends on the cellular need.
Glucose-6-phosphate
Fructose-6-phosphate
Fructose1, 6-bisphosphate
Triose phosphate (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate)
Triose phosphate (Dihydroxy acetone phosphate)
2 × Triose bisphosphate (1,3 bisphosphoglyceric acid)
2 × Triose phosphate (3-phosphoglyceric acid)
2 × 2-phosphoglycerate
2 × phosphoenolpyruvate
2 × Pyruvic acid
Figure 12.1 Steps of glycolysis
Reprint 2026-27
RESPIRATION IN PLANTS 157
There are three major ways in which different cells handle pyruvic acid produced by glycolysis. These are lactic acid fermentation, alcoholic fermentation and aerobic respiration. Fermentation takes place under anaerobic conditions in many prokaryotes and unicellular eukaryotes.
For the complete oxidation of glucose to CO2 and H2O, however, organisms adopt Krebs’ cycle which is also called as aerobic respiration. This requires
O2 supply.
12.3 FERMENTATION
In fermentation, say by yeast, the incomplete oxidation of glucose is achieved under anaerobic conditions by sets of reactions where pyruvic acid is converted to CO2 and ethanol. The enzymes, pyruvic acid decarboxylase and alcohol dehydrogenase catalyse these reactions. Other organisms like some bacteria produce lactic acid from pyruvic acid. The steps involved are shown in Figure 12.2. In animal cells also, like muscles during exercise, when oxygen is inadequate for cellular respiration pyruvic acid is reduced to lactic acid by lactate dehydrogenase. The reducing agent is NADH+H+ which is reoxidised to NAD+ in both the processes.
In both lactic acid and alcohol fermentation not much energy is released; less than seven per cent of the energy in glucose is released and not all of it is trapped as high energy bonds of ATP. Also, the processes are hazardous – either acid or alcohol is produced.
What is the net ATPs that is synthesised (calculate how many ATP are synthesised and deduct the number of ATP utilised during glycolysis) when one molecule of glucose is fermented to alcohol or lactic acid? Yeasts poison themselves to death when the concentration of alcohol reaches about 13 per cent. What then would be What then would be What then would be What then would be What then would be the the the the the maximum maximum maximum maximum maximum concentration of alcohol in beverages that concentration of alcohol in beverages that concentration of alcohol in beverages that concentration of alcohol in beverages that concentration of alcohol in beverages that are naturally fermented? are naturally fermented? are naturally fermented? are naturally fermented? are naturally fermented? How do you think alcoholic beverages of alcohol content greater than this concentration are obtained?
What then is the process by which organisms can carry out complete oxidation of glucose and extract the energy stored to
Figure 12.2 Major pathways of anaerobic respiration
Reprint 2026-27
158 BIOLOGY synthesise a larger number of ATP molecules needed for cellular metabolism? In eukaryotes these steps take place within the mitochondria and this requires O2. Aerobic respiration is the process that leads to a complete oxidation of organic substances in the presence of oxygen, and releases CO2, water and a large amount of energy present in the substrate.
This type of respiration is most common in higher organisms. We will look at these processes in the next section.
12.4 AEROBIC RESPIRATION
For aerobic respiration to take place within the mitochondria, the final product of glycolysis, pyruvate is transported from the cytoplasm into the mitochondria. The crucial events in aerobic respiration are:
• The complete oxidation of pyruvate by the stepwise removal of all the hydrogen atoms, leaving three molecules of CO2.
• The passing on of the electrons removed as part of the hydrogen atoms to molecular O2 with simultaneous synthesis of ATP.
What is interesting to note is that the first process takes place in the matrix of the mitochondria while the second process is located on the inner membrane of the mitochondria.
Pyruvate, which is formed by the glycolytic catabolism of carbohydrates in the cytosol, after it enters mitochondrial matrix undergoes oxidative decarboxylation by a complex set of reactions catalysed by pyruvic dehydrogenase. The reactions catalysed by pyruvic dehydrogenase require the participation of several coenzymes, including NAD+ and Coenzyme A.
Pyruvic acid CoA NAD Mg
Pyruvate dehydrogenase
+ +  → + + 2
  + + + +
Acetyl CoA CO NADH H 2
During this process, two molecules of NADH are produced from the metabolism of two molecules of pyruvic acid (produced from one glucose molecule during glycolysis).
The acetyl CoA then enters a cyclic pathway, tricarboxylic acid cycle, more commonly called as Krebs’ cycle after the scientist Hans Krebs who first elucidated it.
12.4.1 Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle
The TCA cycle starts with the condensation of acetyl group with oxaloacetic acid (OAA) and water to yield citric acid (Figure 12.3). The reaction is catalysed by the enzyme citrate synthase and a molecule of CoA is released.
Citrate is then isomerised to isocitrate. It is followed by two successive steps of decarboxylation, leading to the formation of α-ketoglutaric acid
Reprint 2026-27
RESPIRATION IN PLANTS 159
Pyruvic acid NAD FAD H O ADP Pi Mitochondrial Matrix+ + + + +  → + +
4 2 2   + + +
3 4 4 2 CO NADH H and then succinyl-CoA. In the remaining steps of citric acid cycle, succinyl-CoA is oxidised to
OAA allowing the cycle to continue. During the conversion of succinyl-CoA to succinic acid a molecule of GTP is synthesised. This is a substrate level phosphorylation. In a coupled reaction GTP is converted to GDP with the simultaneous synthesis of ATP from ADP.
Also there are three points in the cycle where
NAD+ is reduced to NADH + H+ and one point where FAD+ is reduced to FADH2. The continued oxidation of acetyl CoA via the TCA cycle requires the continued replenishment of oxaloacetic acid, the first member of the cycle.
In addition it also requires regeneration of
NAD+ and FAD+ from NADH and FADH2 respectively. The summary equation for this phase of respiration may be written as follows:
+ + 2 FADH ATP
We have till now seen that glucose has been broken down to release
CO2 and eight molecules of NADH + H+ and two of FADH2 have been synthesised besides just two molecules of ATP in TCA cycle. You may be wondering why we have been discussing respiration at all – neither O2 has come into the picture nor the promised large number of ATP has yet been synthesised. Also what is the role of the NADH + H+ and FADH2 that is synthesised? Let us now understand the role of O2 in respiration and how ATP is synthesised.
12.4.2 Electron Transport System (ETS) and Oxidative
Phosphorylation
The following steps in the respiratory process are to release and utilise the energy stored in NADH+H+ and FADH2. This is accomplished when they are oxidised through the electron transport system and the electrons are passed on to O2 resulting in the formation of H2O. The metabolic pathway through which the electron passes from one carrier to another, is called the electron transport system (ETS) (Figure 12.4) and it is present in the inner mitochondrial membrane. Electrons from NADH
Figure 12.3 The Citric acid cycle
Pyruvate
Acetyl coenzyme A
Citric acid
Oxaloacetic acid (4C) CO2
CITRIC ACID CYCLE
α-ketoglutaric acid
Succinic acid
Malic acid
CoA NAD+
Reprint 2026-27
160 BIOLOGY produced in the mitochondrial matrix during citric acid cycle are oxidised by an NADH dehydrogenase (complex I), and electrons are then transferred to ubiquinone located within the inner membrane. Ubiquinone also receives reducing equivalents via FADH2 (complex
II) that is generated during oxidation of succinate in the citric acid cycle. The reduced ubiquinone (ubiquinol) is then oxidised with the transfer of electrons to cytochrome c via cytochrome bc1 complex (complex III). Cytochrome c is a small protein attached to the outer surface of the inner membrane and acts as a mobile carrier for transfer of electrons between complex III and IV.
Complex IV refers to cytochrome c oxidase complex containing cytochromes a and a3, and two copper centres.
When the electrons pass from one carrier to another via complex I to IV in the electron transport chain, they are coupled to ATP synthase (complex V) for the production of ATP from ADP and inorganic phosphate. The number of ATP molecules synthesised depends on the nature of the electron donor. Oxidation of one molecule of NADH gives rise to 3 molecules of ATP, while that of one molecule of FADH2 produces 2 molecules of ATP. Although the aerobic process of respiration takes place only in the presence of oxygen, the role of oxygen is limited to the terminal stage of the process. Yet, the presence of oxygen is vital, since it drives the whole process by removing hydrogen from the system. Oxygen acts as the final hydrogen acceptor. Unlike photophosphorylation where it is the light energy that is utilised for the production of proton gradient required for phosphorylation, in respiration it is the energy of oxidation-reduction utilised for the same process. It is for this reason that the process is called oxidative phosphorylation.
You have already studied about the mechanism of membrane-linked
ATP synthesis as explained by chemiosmotic hypothesis in the earlier chapter. As mentioned earlier, the energy released during the electron
Figure 12.4 Electron Transport System (ETS)
Reprint 2026-27
RESPIRATION IN PLANTS 161 transport system is utilised in synthesising ATP with the help of ATP synthase (complex V). This complex consists of two major components, F1 and F0 (Figure 12.5). The F1 headpiece is a peripheral membrane protein complex and contains the site for synthesis of ATP from ADP and inorganic phosphate. F0 is an integral membrane protein complex that forms the channel through which protons cross the inner membrane. The passage of protons through the channel is coupled to the ca
