187 Haloalkanes and Haloarenes
Carbon compounds containing more than one halogen atom are usually referred to as polyhalogen compounds. Many of these compounds are useful in industry and agriculture. Some polyhalogen compounds are described in this section.
Dichloromethane is widely used as a solvent as a paint remover, as a propellant in aerosols, and as a process solvent in the manufacture of drugs. It is also used as a metal cleaning and finishing solvent. Methylene chloride harms the human central nervous system. Exposure to lower levels of methylene chloride in air can lead to slightly impaired hearing and vision. Higher levels of methylene chloride in air cause dizziness, nausea, tingling and numbness in the fingers and toes. In humans, direct skin contact with methylene chloride causes intense burning and mild redness of the skin. Direct contact with the eyes can burn the cornea.
Chemically, chloroform is employed as a solvent for fats, alkaloids, iodine and other substances. The major use of chloroform today is in the production of the freon refrigerant R-22. It was once used as a general anaesthetic in surgery but has been replaced by less toxic, safer anaesthetics, such as ether. As might be expected from its use as an anaesthetic, inhaling chloroform vapours depresses the central nervous system. Breathing about 900 parts of chloroform per million parts of air (900 parts per million) for a short time can cause dizziness, fatigue, and headache. Chronic chloroform exposure may cause damage to the liver (where chloroform is metabolised to phosgene) and to the kidneys, and some people develop sores when the skin is immersed in chloroform. Chloroform is slowly oxidised by air in the presence of light to an extremely poisonous gas, carbonyl chloride, also known as phosgene. It is therefore stored in closed dark coloured bottles completely filled so that air is kept out.
It was used earlier as an antiseptic but the antiseptic properties are due to the liberation of free iodine and not due to iodoform itself. Due to its objectionable smell, it has been replaced by other formulations containing iodine.
It is produced in large quantities for use in the manufacture of refrigerants and propellants for aerosol cans. It is also used as feedstock in the synthesis of chlorofluorocarbons and other chemicals, pharmaceutical manufacturing, and general solvent use. Until the mid
1960s, it was also widely used as a cleaning fluid, both in industry, as a degreasing agent, and in the home, as a spot remover and as fire extinguisher. There is some evidence that exposure to carbon tetrachloride causes liver cancer in humans. The most common effects are dizziness, light headedness, nausea and vomiting, which can cause permanent damage to nerve cells. In severe cases, these effects can lead rapidly to stupor, coma, unconsciousness or death. Exposure to CCl4 can make the heart beat irregularly or stop. The chemical may irritate the eyes on contact. When carbon tetrachloride is released into the air, it rises to the atmosphere and depletes the ozone layer. Depletion of the
6.8 6.8 6.8 6.8 6.8 Polyhalogen Polyhalogen Polyhalogen Polyhalogen Polyhalogen
Compounds Compounds Compounds Compounds Compounds
6.8.1 Dichloro- (Methylene chloride)
6.8.3 Triiodo- (Iodoform)
6.8.4 Tetrachlo- romethane tetrachloride)
6.8.2 Trichloro- (Chloroform)
Reprint 2026-27
188 Chemistry ozone layer is believed to increase human exposure to ultraviolet rays, leading to increased skin cancer, eye diseases and disorders, and possible disruption of the immune system.
The chlorofluorocarbon compounds of methane and ethane are collectively known as freons. They are extremely stable, unreactive, non-toxic, non- corrosive and easily liquefiable gases. Freon 12 (CCl2F2) is one of the most common freons in industrial use. It is manufactured from tetrachloromethane by Swarts reaction. These are usually produced for aerosol propellants, refrigeration and air conditioning purposes. By
1974, total freon production in the world was about 2 billion pounds annually. Most freon, even that used in refrigeration, eventually makes its way into the atmosphere where it diffuses unchanged into the stratosphere. In stratosphere, freon is able to initiate radical chain reactions that can upset the natural ozone balance.
DDT, the first chlorinated organic insecticides, was originally prepared in 1873, but it was not until 1939 that Paul Muller of Geigy
Pharmaceuticals in Switzerland discovered the effectiveness of DDT as an insecticide. Paul Muller was awarded the Nobel Prize in Medicine and Physiology in 1948 for this discovery. The use of DDT increased enormously on a worldwide basis after World War II, primarily because of its effectiveness against the mosquito that spreads malaria and lice that carry typhus. However, problems related to extensive use of DDT began to appear in the late 1940s. Many species of insects developed resistance to DDT, and it was also discovered to have a high toxicity towards fish. The chemical stability of DDT and its fat solubility compounded the problem. DDT is not metabolised very rapidly by animals; instead, it is deposited and stored in the fatty tissues. If ingestion continues at a steady rate, DDT builds up within the animal over time. The use of DDT was banned in the United States in 1973, although it is still in use in some other parts of the world.
6.8.5 Freons
6.8.6 p,p’-Dichlo- rodiphenyl- trichloro- ethane(DDT)
Summary Summary Summary Summary Summary
Alkyl/ Aryl halides may be classified as mono, di, or polyhalogen (tri-, tetra-, etc.)
compounds depending on whether they contain one, two or more halogen atoms in their structures. Since halogen atoms are more electronegative than carbon, the carbon- halogen bond of alkyl halide is polarised; the carbon atom bears a partial positive charge, and the halogen atom bears a partial negative charge.
Alkyl halides are prepared by the free radical halogenation of alkanes, addition of halogen acids to alkenes, replacement of –OH group of alcohols with halogens using
Reprint 2026-27
189 Haloalkanes and Haloarenes phosphorus halides, thionyl chloride or halogen acids. Aryl halides are prepared by electrophilic substitution to arenes. Fluorides and iodides are best prepared by halogen exchange method.
The boiling points of organohalogen compounds are comparatively higher than the corresponding hydrocarbons because of strong dipole-dipole and van der Waals forces of attraction. These are slightly soluble in water but completely soluble in organic solvents.
The polarity of carbon-halogen bond of alkyl halides is responsible for their nucleophilic substitution, elimination and their reaction with metal atoms to form organometallic compounds. Nucleophilic substitution reactions are categorised into
SN1 and SN2 on the basis of their kinetic properties. Chirality has a profound role in understanding the reaction mechanisms of SN1 and SN2 reactions. SN2 reactions of chiral alkyl halides are characterised by the inversion of configuration while SN1 reactions are characterised by racemisation.
A number of polyhalogen compounds e.g., dichloromethane, chloroform, iodoform, carbon tetrachloride, freon and DDT have many industrial applications. However, some of these compounds cannot be easily decomposed and even cause depletion of ozone layer and are proving environmental hazards.
6.1 Name the following halides according to IUPAC system and classify them as alkyl, allyl, benzyl (primary, secondary, tertiary), vinyl or aryl halides:
(i) (CH3)2CHCH(Cl)CH3 (ii) CH3CH2CH(CH3)CH(C2H5)Cl (iii) CH3CH2C(CH3)2CH2I (iv) (CH3)3CCH2CH(Br)C6H5 (v) CH3CH(CH3)CH(Br)CH3 (vi) CH3C(C2H5)2CH2Br (vii) CH3C(Cl)(C2H5)CH2CH3 (viii) CH3CH=C(Cl)CH2CH(CH3)2 (ix) CH3CH=CHC(Br)(CH3)2 (x) p-ClC6H4CH2CH(CH3)2 (xi) m-ClCH2C6H4CH2C(CH3)3 (xii) o-Br-C6H4CH(CH3)CH2CH3
6.2 Give the IUPAC names of the following compounds:
(i) CH3CH(Cl)CH(Br)CH3 (ii) CHF2CBrClF (iii) ClCH2C∫CCH2Br (iv) (CCl3)3CCl (v) CH3C(p-ClC6H4)2CH(Br)CH3 (vi) (CH3)3CCH=CClC6H4I-p
6.3 Write the structures of the following organic halogen compounds.
(i) 2-Chloro-3-methylpentane (ii) p-Bromochlorobenzene (iii) 1-Chloro-4-ethylcyclohexane (iv) 2-(2-Chlorophenyl)-1-iodooctane (v) 2-Bromobutane (vi) 4-tert-Butyl-3-iodoheptane (vii) 1-Bromo-4-sec-butyl-2-methylbenzene (viii) 1,4-Dibromobut-2-ene
6.4 Which one of the following has the highest dipole moment?
(i) CH2Cl2 (ii) CHCl3 (iii) CCl4
6.5 A hydrocarbon C5H10 does not react with chlorine in dark but gives a single monochloro compound C5H9Cl in bright sunlight. Identify the hydrocarbon.
6.6 Write the isomers of the compound having formula C4H9Br.
6.7 Write the equations for the preparation of 1-iodobutane from (i) 1-butanol (ii) 1-chlorobutane (iii) but-1-ene.
6.8 What are ambident nucleophiles? Explain with an example.
Exercises
Reprint 2026-27
190 Chemistry
6.9 Which compound in each of the following pairs will react faster in SN2 reaction with –OH?
(i) CH3Br or CH3I (ii) (CH3)3CCl or CH3Cl
6.10 Predict all the alkenes that would be formed by dehydrohalogenation of the following halides with sodium ethoxide in ethanol and identify the major alkene:
(i) 1-Bromo-1-methylcyclohexane (ii) 2-Chloro-2-methylbutane (iii) 2,2,3-Trimethyl-3-bromopentane.
6.11 How will you bring about the following conversions?
(i) Ethanol to but-1-yne (ii) Ethane to bromoethene (iii) Propene to
1-nitropropane (iv) Toluene to benzyl alcohol (v) Propene to propyne (vi) Ethanol to ethyl fluoride (vii) Bromomethane to propanone (viii) But-1-ene to but-2-ene (ix) 1-Chlorobutane to n-octane (x) Benzene to biphenyl.
6.12 Explain why (i) the dipole moment of chlorobenzene is lower than that of cyclohexyl chloride?
(ii) alkyl halides, though polar, are immiscible with water?
(iii) Grignard reagents should be prepared under anhydrous conditions?
6.13 Give the uses of freon 12, DDT, carbon tetrachloride and iodoform.
6.14 Write the structure of the major organic product in each of the following reactions:
(i) CH3CH2CH2Cl + NaI (ii) (CH3)3CBr + KOH (iii) CH3CH(Br)CH2CH3 + NaOH (iv) CH3CH2Br + KCN (v) C6H5ONa + C2H5Cl (vi) CH3CH2CH2OH + SOCl2 (vii) CH3CH2CH = CH2 + HBr (viii) CH3CH = C(CH3)2 + HBr
6.15 Write the mechanism of the following reaction:
nBuBr + KCN nBuCN
6.16 Arrange the compounds of each set in order of reactivity towards SN2 displacement:
(i) 2-Bromo-2-methylbutane, 1-Bromopentane, 2-Bromopentane (ii) 1-Bromo-3-methylbutane, 2-Bromo-2-methylbutane, 2-Bromo-3-methylbutane (iii) 1-Bromobutane, 1-Bromo-2,2-dimethylpropane, 1-Bromo-2-methylbutane,
1-Bromo-3-methylbutane.
6.17 Out of C6H5CH2Cl and C6H5CHClC6H5, which is more easily hydrolysed by aqueous
6.18 p-Dichlorobenzene has higher m.p. than those of o- and m-isomers. Discuss.
6.19 How the following conversions can be carried out?
(i) Propene to propan-1-ol (ii) Ethanol to but-1-yne (iii) 1-Bromopropane to 2-bromopropane
Reprint 2026-27
191 Haloalkanes and Haloarenes (iv) Toluene to benzyl alcohol (v) Benzene to 4-bromonitrobenzene (vi) Benzyl alcohol to 2-phenylethanoic acid (vii) Ethanol to propanenitrile (viii) Aniline to chlorobenzene (ix) 2-Chlorobutane to 3, 4-dimethylhexane (x) 2-Methyl-1-propene to 2-chloro-2-methylpropane (xi) Ethyl chloride to propanoic acid (xii) But-1-ene to n-butyliodide (xiii) 2-Chloropropane to 1-propanol (xiv) Isopropyl alcohol to iodoform (xv) Chlorobenzene to p-nitrophenol (xvi) 2-Bromopropane to 1-bromopropane (xvii) Chloroethane to butane (xviii) Benzene to diphenyl (xix) tert-Butyl bromide to isobutyl bromide (xx) Aniline to phenylisocyanide
6.20 The treatment of alkyl chlorides with aqueous KOH leads to the formation of alcohols but in the presence of alcoholic KOH, alkenes are major products. Explain.
6.21 Primary alkyl halide C4H9Br (a) reacted with alcoholic KOH to give compound (b).
Compound (b) is reacted with HBr to give (c) which is an isomer of (a). When (a) is reacted with sodium metal it gives compound (d), C8H18 which is different from the compound formed when n-butyl bromide is reacted with sodium.
Give the structural formula of (a) and write the equations for all the reactions.
6.22 What happens when (i) n-butyl chloride is treated with alcoholic KOH, (ii) bromobenzene is treated with Mg in the presence of dry ether, (iii) chlorobenzene is subjected to hydrolysis, (iv) ethyl chloride is treated with aqueous KOH, (v) methyl bromide is treated with sodium in the presence of dry ether, (vi) methyl chloride is treated with KCN?
Answers to Some Intext Questions
6.2 (i) H2SO4 cannot be used along with KI in the conversion of an alcohol to an alkyl iodide as it converts KI to corresponding acid, HI which is then oxidised by it to I2.
6.3 (i) ClCH2CH2CH2Cl (ii) ClCH2CHClCH3 (iii) Cl2CHCH2CH3 (iv) CH3CCl2CH3
Reprint 2026-27
192 Chemistry
6.6 (i) Chloromethane, Bromomethane, Dibromomethane, Bromoform.
Boiling point increases with increase in molecular mass.
(ii) Isopropylchloride, 1-Chloropropane, 1-Chlorobutane.
Isopropylchloride being branched has lower b.p. than 1-
Chloropropane.
6.7 (i) CH3CH2CH2CH2Br Being primary halide, there won’t be any steric hindrance.
(ii) Secondary halide reacts faster than tertiary (iii) The presence of methyl group closer to the halide group will increase the steric hindrance and decrease the rate.
The equivalent hydrogens are grouped as a, b and c. The replacement of equivalent hydrogens will give the same product.
All the hydrogen atoms are equivalent and replacement of any hydrogen will give the same product.
Similarly the equivalent hydrogens are grouped as a, b, c and d. Thus, four isomeric products are possible.
6.8 (i) Tertiary halide reacts faster than secondary halide because of the greater stability of tert-carbocation.
(ii) Because of greater stability of secondary carbocation than primary.
Reprint 2026-27
After studying this Unit, you will be
• name alcohols, phenols and ethers according to the IUPAC system of nomenclature;
• discuss the reactions involved in the preparation of alcohols from alkenes, aldehydes, ketones and carboxylic acids;
• discuss the reactions involved in the preparation of phenols from haloarenes, benzene sulphonic acids, diazonium salts and
• discuss the reactions for preparation of ethers from (i) alcohols and (ii) alkyl halides and sodium alkoxides/aryloxides;
• correlate physical properties of alcohols, phenols and ethers with their structures;
• discuss chemical reactions of the three classes of compounds on the basis of their functional
Objectives
Alcohols, phenols and ethers are the basic compounds for the formation of detergents, antiseptics and fragrances, respectively.
Unit Unit Unit Unit Unit
7Alcohols Alcohols Alcohols Alcohols Alcohols, , , , , Phenols Phenols Phenols Phenols Phenols and and and and and E E E E Ether ther ther ther thers s s s s
Alcohols Alcohols Alcohols Alcohols Alcohols, , , , , Phenols Phenols Phenols Phenols Phenols and and and and and E E E E Ether ther ther ther thers s s s s
You have learnt that substitution of one or more hydrogen atom(s) from a hydrocarbon by another atom or a group of atoms result in the formation of an entirely new compound having altogether different properties and applications. Alcohols and phenols are formed when a hydrogen atom in a hydrocarbon, aliphatic and aromatic respectively, is replaced by –OH group. These classes of compounds find wide applications in industry as well as in day-to-day life. For instance, have you ever noticed that ordinary spirit used for polishing wooden furniture is chiefly a compound containing hydroxyl group, ethanol. The sugar we eat, the cotton used for fabrics, the paper we use for writing, are all made up of compounds containing –OH groups. Just think of life without paper; no note-books, books, news- papers, currency notes, cheques, certificates, etc. The magazines carrying beautiful photographs and interesting stories would disappear from our life. It would have been really a different world.
An alcohol contains one or more hydroxyl (OH)
group(s) directly attached to carbon atom(s), of an aliphatic system (CH3OH) while a phenol contains –OH group(s) directly attached to carbon atom(s) of an aromatic system (C6H5OH).
The substitution of a hydrogen atom in a hydrocarbon by an alkoxy or aryloxy group (R–O/Ar–O) yields another class of compounds known as ‘ethers’, for example, CH3OCH3 (dimethyl ether). You may also visualise ethers as compounds formed by
Reprint 2026-27
