215 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
1. By dehydration of alcohols
Alcohols undergo dehydration in the presence of protic acids (H2SO4, H3PO4). The formation of the reaction product, alkene or ether depends on the reaction conditions. For example, ethanol is dehydrated to ethene in the presence of sulphuric acid at 443 K.
At 413 K, ethoxyethane is the main product.
The formation of ether is a nucleophilic bimolecular reaction (SN2)
involving the attack of alcohol molecule on a protonated alcohol, as indicated below:
7.6 7.6 7.6 7.6 7.6 Ethers Ethers Ethers Ethers Ethers
7.6.1 Preparation of Ethers
Acidic dehydration of alcohols, to give an alkene is also associated with substitution reaction to give an ether.
The method is suitable for the preparation of ethers having primary alkyl groups only. The alkyl group should be unhindered and the temperature be kept low. Otherwise the reaction favours the formation of alkene. The reaction follows SN1 pathway when the alcohol is secondary or tertiary about which you will learn in higher classes.
However, the dehydration of secondary and tertiary alcohols to give corresponding ethers is unsuccessful as elimination competes over substitution and as a consequence, alkenes are easily formed.
Can you explain why is bimolecular dehydration not appropriate for the preparation of ethyl methyl ether?
2. Williamson synthesis
It is an important laboratory method for the preparation of symmetrical and unsymmetrical ethers. In this method, an alkyl halide is allowed to react with sodium alkoxide.
R–X + Na R –O ’ R–O–R + Na X ’
Ethers containing substituted alkyl groups (secondary or tertiary)
may also be prepared by this method. The reaction involves SN2 attack of an alkoxide ion on primary alkyl halide.
Diethyl ether has been used widely as an inhalation anaesthetic.
But due to its slow effect and an unpleasant recovery period, it has been replaced, as an anaesthetic, by other compounds.
Alexander William
Williamson (1824–1904)
was born in London of
Scottish parents. In
1849, he became
Professor of Chemistry at University College,
Reprint 2026-27
216 Chemistry
O CH –Br 3 Na +
Better results are obtained if the alkyl halide is primary. In case of secondary and tertiary alkyl halides, elimination competes over substitution. If a tertiary alkyl halide is used, an alkene is the only reaction product and no ether is formed. For example, the reaction of
CH3ONa with (CH3)3C–Br gives exclusively 2-methylpropene.
It is because alkoxides are not only nucleophiles but strong bases as well. They react with alkyl halides leading to elimination reactions.
The following is not an appropriate reaction for the preparation of t-butyl ethyl ether.
(i) What would be the major product of this reaction ?
(ii) Write a suitable reaction for the preparation of t-butylethyl ether.
(i) The major product of the given reaction is 2-methylprop-1-ene.
It is because sodium ethoxide is a strong nucleophile as well as a strong base. Thus elimination reaction predominates over substitution.
Example 7.6 Example 7.6 Example 7.6 Example 7.6 Example 7.6
Solution Solution Solution Solution Solution
Phenols are also converted to ethers by this method. In this, phenol is used as the phenoxide moiety.
Reprint 2026-27
217 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
The C-O bonds in ethers are polar and thus, ethers have a net dipole moment. The weak polarity of ethers do not appreciably affect their boiling points which are comparable to those of the alkanes of comparable molecular masses but are much lower than the boiling points of alcohols as shown in the following cases:
Formula CH3(CH2)3CH3 C2H5-O-C2H5 CH3(CH2)3-OH n-Pentane Ethoxyethane Butan-1-ol b.p./K 309.1 307.6 390
The large difference in boiling points of alcohols and ethers is due to the presence of hydrogen bonding in alcohols.
The miscibility of ethers with water resembles those of alcohols of the same molecular mass. Both ethoxyethane and butan-1-ol are miscible to almost the same extent i.e., 7.5 and 9 g per 100 mL water, respectively while pentane is essentially immiscible with water. Can you explain this observation ? This is due to the fact that just like alcohols, oxygen of ether can also form hydrogen bonds with water molecule as shown:
1. Cleavage of C–O bond in ethers
Ethers are the least reactive of the functional groups. The cleavage of
C-O bond in ethers takes place under drastic conditions with excess of hydrogen halides. The reaction of dialkyl ether gives two alkyl halide molecules.
Alkyl aryl ethers are cleaved at the alkyl-oxygen bond due to the more stable aryl-oxygen bond. The reaction yields phenol and alkyl
Ethers with two different alkyl groups are also cleaved in the same
The order of reactivity of hydrogen halides is as follows:
HI > HBr > HCl. The cleavage of ethers takes place with concentrated
HI or HBr at high temperature.
7.6.2 Physical
Properties
7.6.3 Chemical
Reactions
Reprint 2026-27
218 Chemistry
The reaction of an ether with concentrated HI starts with protonation of ether molecule.
The reaction takes place with HBr or HI because these reagents are sufficiently acidic.
Iodide is a good nucleophile. It attacks the least substituted carbon of the oxonium ion formed in step 1 and displaces an alcohol molecule by SN2 mechanism.
Thus, in the cleavage of mixed ethers with two different alkyl groups, the alcohol and alkyl iodide formed, depend on the nature of alkyl groups. When primary or secondary alkyl groups are present, it is the lower alkyl group that forms alkyl iodide (SN2 reaction).
When HI is in excess and the reaction is carried out at high temperature, ethanol reacts with another molecule of HI and is converted to ethyl iodide.
Mechanism Mechanism Mechanism Mechanism Mechanism
However, when one of the alkyl group is a tertiary group, the halide formed is a tertiary halide.
CH C CH + HI CH OH +CH C I 3 3 3 3
It is because in step 2 of the reaction, the departure of leaving group (HO–CH3) creates a more stable carbocation [(CH3)3C+], and the reaction follows SN1 mechanism.
In case of anisole, methylphenyl oxonium ion, is formed by protonation of ether. The bond between O–CH3 is weaker than the bond between O–C6H5 because the carbon of phenyl group is sp2 hybridised and there is a partial double bond character.
slow CH3 C
+ + CH OH 3 fast CH3 C
Reprint 2026-27
219 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
Therefore the attack by I– ion breaks O–CH3 bond to form CH3I. Phenols do not react further to give halides because the sp2 hybridised carbon of phenol cannot undergo nucleophilic substitution reaction needed for conversion to the halide.
Give the major products that are formed by heating each of the following ethers with HI.
Example 7.7 Example 7.7 Example 7.7 Example 7.7 Example 7.7
Solution Solution Solution Solution Solution (i) (ii)
(i) (ii)
2. Electrophilic substitution
The alkoxy group (-OR) is ortho, para directing and activates the aromatic ring towards electrophilic substitution in the same way as in phenol.
(i) Halogenation: Phenylalkyl ethers undergo usual halogenation in the benzene ring, e.g., anisole undergoes bromination with bromine in ethanoic acid even in the absence of iron (III) bromide catalyst. It is due to the activation of benzene ring by the methoxy group. Para isomer is obtained in 90% yield.
Reprint 2026-27
220 Chemistry
Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions
7.10 Write the reactions of Williamson synthesis of 2-ethoxy-3-methylpentane starting from ethanol and 3-methylpentan-2-ol.
7.11 Which of the following is an appropriate set of reactants for the preparation of 1-methoxy-4-nitrobenzene and why?
(i) (ii)
(ii) Friedel-Crafts reaction: Anisole undergoes Friedel-Crafts reaction, i.e., the alkyl and acyl groups are introduced at ortho and para positions by reaction with alkyl halide and acyl halide in the presence of anhydrous aluminium chloride (a Lewis acid) as catalyst.
(iii) Nitration: Anisole reacts with a mixture of concentrated sulphuric and nitric acids to yield a mixture of ortho and para nitroanisole.
Reprint 2026-27
221 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
7.12 Predict the products of the following reactions:
3 2 2 3 CH CH CH O – CH HBr − − − + →
CH C OC H HI
3 3 2 5 ( ) −  → 
Alcohols and phenols are classified (i) on the basis of the number of hydroxyl groups and (ii) according to the hybridisation of the carbon atom, sp3 or sp2 to which the –OH group is attached. Ethers are classified on the basis of groups attached to the oxygen atom.
Alcohols may be prepared (1) by hydration of alkenes (i) in presence of an acid and (ii) by hydroboration-oxidation reaction (2) from carbonyl compounds by (i) catalytic reduction and (ii) the action of Grignard reagents. Phenols may be prepared by (1) substitution of (i) halogen atom in haloarenes and (ii) sulphonic acid group in aryl sulphonic acids, by –OH group (2) by hydrolysis of diazonium salts and (3) industrially from cumene.
Alcohols are higher boiling than other classes of compounds, namely hydrocarbons, ethers and haloalkanes of comparable molecular masses. The ability of alcohols, phenols and ethers to form intermolecular hydrogen bonding with water makes them soluble in it.
Alcohols and phenols are acidic in nature. Electron withdrawing groups in phenol increase its acidic strength and electron releasing groups decrease it.
Alcohols undergo nucleophilic substitution with hydrogen halides to yield alkyl halides. Dehydration of alcohols gives alkenes. On oxidation, primary alcohols yield aldehydes with mild oxidising agents and carboxylic acids with strong oxidising agents while secondary alcohols yield ketones. Tertiary alcohols are resistant to oxidation.
The presence of –OH group in phenols activates the aromatic ring towards electrophilic substitution and directs the incoming group to ortho and para positions due to resonance effect. Reimer-Tiemann reaction of phenol yields salicylaldehyde. In presence of sodium hydroxide, phenol generates phenoxide ion which is even more reactive than phenol. Thus, in alkaline medium, phenol undergoes Kolbe’s reaction.
Ethers may be prepared by (i) dehydration of alcohols and (ii) Williamson synthesis. The boiling points of ethers resemble those of alkanes while their solubility is comparable to those of alcohols having same molecular mass. The
C–O bond in ethers can be cleaved by hydrogen halides. In electrophilic substitution, the alkoxy group activates the aromatic ring and directs the incoming group to ortho and para positions.
Summary Summary Summary Summary Summary
Reprint 2026-27
222 Chemistry
Exercises
7.1 Write IUPAC names of the following compounds:
(i) (ii)
(iii) (iv)
(v) (vi) (vii) (viii)
(ix) (x) C6H5–O–C2H5 (xi) C6H5–O–C7H15(n–) (xii)
7.2 Write structures of the compounds whose IUPAC names are as follows:
(i) 2-Methylbutan-2-ol (ii) 1-Phenylpropan-2-ol (iii) 3,5-Dimethylhexane –1, 3, 5-triol (iv) 2,3 – Diethylphenol (v) 1 – Ethoxypropane (vi) 2-Ethoxy-3-methylpentane (vii) Cyclohexylmethanol (viii) 3-Cyclohexylpentan-3-ol (ix) Cyclopent-3-en-1-ol (x) 4-Chloro-3-ethylbutan-1-ol.
7.3 (i) Draw the structures of all isomeric alcohols of molecular formula C5H12O and give their IUPAC names.
(ii) Classify the isomers of alcohols in question 11.3 (i) as primary, secondary and tertiary alcohols.
7.4 Explain why propanol has higher boiling point than that of the hydrocarbon,
7.5 Alcohols are comparatively more soluble in water than hydrocarbons of comparable molecular masses. Explain this fact.
7.6 What is meant by hydroboration-oxidation reaction? Illustrate it with an example.
7.7 Give the structures and IUPAC names of monohydric phenols of molecular formula, C7H8O.
7.8 While separating a mixture of ortho and para nitrophenols by steam distillation, name the isomer which will be steam volatile. Give reason.
7.9 Give the equations of reactions for the preparation of phenol from cumene.
7.10 Write chemical reaction for the preparation of phenol from chlorobenzene.
7.11 Write the mechanism of hydration of ethene to yield ethanol.
7.12 You are given benzene, conc. H2SO4 and NaOH. Write the equations for the preparation of phenol using these reagents.
Reprint 2026-27
223 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
7.13 Show how will you synthesise:
(i) 1-phenylethanol from a suitable alkene.
(ii) cyclohexylmethanol using an alkyl halide by an SN2 reaction.
(iii) pentan-1-ol using a suitable alkyl halide?
7.14 Give two reactions that show the acidic nature of phenol. Compare acidity of phenol with that of ethanol.
7.15 Explain why is ortho nitrophenol more acidic than ortho methoxyphenol ?
7.16 Explain how does the –OH group attached to a carbon of benzene ring activate it towards electrophilic substitution?
7.17 Give equations of the following reactions:
(i) Oxidation of propan-1-ol with alkaline KMnO4 solution.
(ii) Bromine in CS2 with phenol.
(iii) Dilute HNO3 with phenol.
(iv) Treating phenol wih chloroform in presence of aqueous NaOH.
7.18 Explain the following with an example.
(i) Kolbe’s reaction.
(ii) Reimer-Tiemann reaction.
(iii) Williamson ether synthesis.
(iv) Unsymmetrical ether.
7.19 Write the mechanism of acid dehydration of ethanol to yield ethene.
7.20 How are the following conversions carried out?
(i) Propene ® Propan-2-ol.
(ii) Benzyl chloride ® Benzyl alcohol.
(iii) Ethyl magnesium chloride ® Propan-1-ol.
(iv) Methyl magnesium bromide ® 2-Methylpropan-2-ol.
7.21 Name the reagents used in the following reactions:
(i) Oxidation of a primary alcohol to carboxylic acid.
(ii) Oxidation of a primary alcohol to aldehyde.
(iii) Bromination of phenol to 2,4,6-tribromophenol.
(iv) Benzyl alcohol to benzoic acid.
(v) Dehydration of propan-2-ol to propene.
(vi) Butan-2-one to butan-2-ol.
7.22 Give reason for the higher boiling point of ethanol in comparison to methoxymethane.
Reprint 2026-27
224 Chemistry
7.23 Give IUPAC names of the following ethers:
7.24 Write the names of reagents and equations for the preparation of the following ethers by Williamson’s synthesis:
(i) 1-Propoxypropane (ii) Ethoxybenzene (iii) 2-Methoxy-2-methylpropane (iv) 1-Methoxyethane
7.25 Illustrate with examples the limitations of Williamson synthesis for the preparation of certain types of ethers.
7.26 How is 1-propoxypropane synthesised from propan-1-ol? Write mechanism of this reaction.
7.27 Preparation of ethers by acid dehydration of secondary or tertiary alcohols is not a suitable method. Give reason.
7.28 Write the equation of the reaction of hydrogen iodide with:
(i) 1-propoxypropane (ii) methoxybenzene and (iii) benzyl ethyl ether.
7.29 Explain the fact that in aryl alkyl ethers (i) the alkoxy group activates the benzene ring towards electrophilic substitution and (ii) it directs the incoming substituents to ortho and para positions in benzene ring.
7.30 Write the mechanism of the reaction of HI with methoxymethane.
7.31 Write equations of the following reactions:
(i) Friedel-Crafts reaction – alkylation of anisole.
(ii) Nitration of anisole.
(iii) Bromination of anisole in ethanoic acid medium.
(iv) Friedel-Craft’s acetylation of anisole.
7.32 Show how would you synthesise the following alcohols from appropriate alkenes?
(i) (ii)
(iii) (iv)
7.33 When 3-methylbutan-2-ol is treated with HBr, the following reaction takes
Give a mechanism for this reaction.
(Hint : The secondary carbocation formed in step II rearranges to a more stable tertiary carbocation by a hydride ion shift from 3rd carbon atom.
Reprint 2026-27
225 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
Answers to Some Intext Questions
7.1 Primary alcohols (i), (ii), (iii)
Secondary alcohols (iv) and (v)
Tertiary alcohols (vi)
7.2 Allylic alcohols (ii) and (vi)
7.3 (i) 4-Chloro-3-ethyl-2-(1-methylethyl)-butan-1-ol (ii) 2, 5-Dimethylhexane-1,3-diol (iii) 3-Bromocyclohexanol (iv) Hex-1-en-3-ol (v) 2-Bromo-3-methylbut-2-en-1-ol
7.5 CH3 CH3 CH (i)
CH2 C OCH3
CH3 CH OH 2 CH (iii)
7.7 (i) 1-Methylcyclohexene (ii) A Mixture of but-1-ene and but-2-ene. But-2-ene is the major product formed due to rearrangement to give secondary carbocation.
C H OH 2 5
CH3 – CH2 – CH –
CH – ONa
HBr C H Br 2 5
C H Br 2 5 + CH3 – CH2 – CH –
CH – OC H 2 5
2-Ethoxy-3-methylpentane
Reprint 2026-27
226 Chemistry
7.11 (ii)
7.12 (i)  3 2 2 3 CH CH CH OH CH Br (ii)
(iii) (iv)   3 2 5 3
CH C I C H OH  
Reprint 2026-27
After studying this Unit, you will be
• write the common and IUPAC names of aldehydes, ketones and carboxylic acids;
• write the structures of the compounds containing functional groups namely carbonyl and carboxyl groups;
• describe the important methods of preparation and reactions of these classes of compounds;
• correlate physical properties and chemical reactions of aldehydes, ketones and carboxylic acids, with their structures;
• explain the mechanism of a few selected reactions of aldehydes and ketones;
• understand various factors affecting the acidity of carboxylic acids and their reactions;
• describe the uses of aldehydes, ketones and carboxylic acids.
Objectives
Carbonyl compounds are of utmost importance to organic chemistry. They are constituents of fabrics, flavourings, plastics and drugs.
Unit Unit Unit Unit Unit
8Aldehydes Aldehydes Aldehydes Aldehydes Aldehydes, , , , , K K K K Ke e e e etones tones tones tones tones and and and and and Carboxylic Carboxylic Carboxylic Carboxylic Carboxylic
A A A A Acids cids cids cids cids
Aldehydes Aldehydes Aldehydes Aldehydes Aldehydes, , , , , K K K K Ke e e e etones tones tones tones tones and and and and and Carboxylic Carboxylic Carboxylic Carboxylic Carboxylic
A A A A Acids cids cids cids cids
In the previous Unit, you have studied organic compounds with functional groups containing carbon- oxygen single bond. In this Unit, we will study about the organic compounds containing carbon-oxygen double bond (>C=O) called carbonyl group, which is one of the most important functional groups in organic chemistry.
In aldehydes, the carbonyl group is bonded to a carbon and hydrogen
