244 Chemistry
Structure Common name IUPAC name
HCOOH Formic acid Methanoic acid
CH3COOH Acetic acid Ethanoic acid
CH3CH2COOH Propionic acid Propanoic acid
CH3CH2CH2COOH Butyric acid Butanoic acid (CH3)2CHCOOH Isobutyric acid 2-Methylpropanoic acid
HOOC-COOH Oxalic acid Ethanedioic acid
HOOC -CH2-COOH Malonic acid Propanedioic acid
HOOC -(CH2)2-COOH Succinic acid Butanedioic acid
HOOC -(CH2)3-COOH Glutaric acid Pentanedioic acid
HOOC -(CH2)4-COOH Adipic acid Hexanedioic acid
HOOC -CH2-CH(COOH)-CH2-COOH Tricarballylic acid Propane-1, 2, 3- or carballylic acid tricarboxylic acid
Carboxylic Acids
Carbon compounds containing a carboxyl functional group, –COOH are called carboxylic acids. The carboxyl group, consists of a carbonyl group attached to a hydroxyl group, hence its name carboxyl. Carboxylic acids may be aliphatic (RCOOH) or aromatic (ArCOOH) depending on the group, alkyl or aryl, attached to carboxylic carbon. Large number of carboxylic acids are found in nature. Some higher members of aliphatic carboxylic acids (C12 – C18) known as fatty acids, occur in natural fats as esters of glycerol. Carboxylic acids serve as starting material for several other important organic compounds such as anhydrides, esters, acid chlorides, amides, etc.
Since carboxylic acids are amongst the earliest organic compounds to be isolated from nature, a large number of them are known by their common names. The common names end with the suffix –ic acid and have been derived from Latin or Greek names of their natural sources.
For example, formic acid (HCOOH) was first obtained from red ants (Latin: formica means ant), acetic acid (CH3COOH) from vinegar (Latin:
acetum, means vinegar), butyric acid (CH3CH2CH2COOH) from rancid butter (Latin: butyrum, means butter).
In the IUPAC system, aliphatic carboxylic acids are named by replacing the ending –e in the name of the corresponding alkane with – oic acid. In numbering the carbon chain, the carboxylic carbon is numbered one. For naming compounds containing more than one carboxyl group, the alkyl chain leaving carboxyl groups is numbered and the number of carboxyl groups is indicated by adding the multiplicative prefix, dicarboxylic acid, tricarboxylic acid, etc. to the name of parent alkyl chain. The position of –COOH groups are indicated by the arabic numeral before the multiplicative prefix. Some of the carboxylic acids along with their common and IUPAC names are listed in Table 8.3.
8.6 8.6 8.6 8.6 8.6 Nomenclature and Structure of Carboxyl Group Nomenclature and Structure of Carboxyl Group Nomenclature and Structure of Carboxyl Group Nomenclature and Structure of Carboxyl Group Nomenclature and Structure of Carboxyl Group
Table 8.3 Names and Structures of Some Carboxylic Acids
Nomenclature
Reprint 2026-27
