23 WATER RESOURCES
In recent years, multi-purpose projects and large dams have come under great scrutiny and opposition for a variety of reasons. Regulating and damming of rivers affect their natural flow causing poor sediment flow and excessive sedimentation at the bottom of the reservoir, resulting in rockier stream beds and poorer habitats for the rivers’ aquatic life. Dams also fragment rivers making it difficult for aquatic fauna to migrate, especially for spawning. The reservoirs that are created on the floodplains also submerge the existing vegetation and soil leading to its decomposition over a period of time.
Ironically, the dams that were constructed to control floods have triggered floods due to sedimentation in the reservoir. Moreover, the big dams have mostly been unsuccessful in controlling floods at the time of excessive rainfall.
These floods have not only devastated life and property but also caused extensive soil erosion. Sedimentation also meant that the flood plains were deprived of silt, a natural fertiliser, further adding on to the problem of land degradation. It was also observed that the multi- purpose projects induced earthquakes, caused water-borne diseases and pests and pollution resulting from excessive use of water.
Irrigation has also changed the cropping pattern of many regions with farmers shifting to water intensive and commercial crops. This has great ecological consequences like salinisation of the soil.
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana has been started which ensures access to some means to protective irrigation for all agricultural farms in the country, thus bringing much desired rural prosperity. Some of the broad objectives of this programme are to enhance the physical access of water on the farm and expand cultivable area under assured irrigation (har khet ko pani), improve on-farm water use efficiency to reduce wastage and increase availability both in duration and extent, irrigation and other water saving technologies (per drop more crop) and introduce sustainable water conservation practices, etc.
Collect information about floods occurred in different parts of the country due to heavy rainfall in recent times.
Sardar Sarovar Dam has been built over the Narmada River in Gujarat. This is one of the largest water resource projects of
India covering four states—Maharashtra,
Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat and Rajasthan.
The Sardar Sarovar project would meet the requirement of water in drought-prone and desert areas. Sardar Sarovar Project will provide irrigation facilities to 18.45 lakh hectare of land, covering 3112 villages in
15 districts of Gujarat. It will also irrigate
2,46,000 hectare of land in the strategic desert districts of Barmer and Jalore in
Rajasthan and 37,500 hectare in the tribal hilly tract of Maharashtra through lift.
About 75 per cent of the command area in
Gujarat is drought prone while entire command in Rajasthan is drought prone.
Assured water supply will soon make this area drought proof.
Source: Sardar Sarovar Narmada Nigam Ltd.
https://www.sardarsarovardam.org/
Do you know that the Krishna-Godavari dispute is due to the objections raised by
Kar nataka and Andhra Pradesh governments? It is regarding the diversion of more water at Koyna by the Maharashtra government for a multipurpose project. This would reduce downstream flow in their states with adverse consequences for agriculture and industry.
Make a list of inter-state water disputes.
Reprint 2026-27
24 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
India: Major Rivers and Dams
Reprint 2026-27
25 WATER RESOURCES
R R R R RAINWATER AINWATER AINWATER AINWATER AINWATER H H H H HARVESTING ARVESTING ARVESTING ARVESTING ARVESTING
Many thought that given the disadvantages and rising resistance against the multi- purpose projects, water harvesting system was a viable alternative, both socio- economically and environmentally. In ancient India, along with the sophisticated hydraulic structures, there existed an extraordinary tradition of water-harvesting system. People had in-depth knowledge of rainfall regimes and soil types and developed w i d e r a n g i n g t e c h n i q u e s t o h a r v e s t rainwater, groundwater, river water and flood water in keeping with the local ecological conditions and their water needs. In hill and mountainous regions, people built diversion channels like the ‘guls’ or ‘kuls’ of the
Western Himalayas for agriculture. ‘Rooftop r a i n w a t e r h a r v e s t i n g ’ w a s c o m m o n l y p r a c t i s e d t o s t o r e d r i n k i n g w a t e r , particularly in Rajasthan. In the flood plains of Bengal, people developed inundation channels to irrigate their fields. In arid and semi-arid regions, agricultural fields were converted into rain fed storage structures that allowed the water to stand and moisten the soil like the ‘khadins’ in Jaisalmer and
‘Johads’ in other parts of Rajasthan.
In the semi-arid and arid regions of
Rajasthan, particularly in Bikaner, Phalodi a n d B a r m e r , a l m o s t a l l t h e h o u s e s traditionally had underground tanks or tankas for storing drinking water. The tanks could be as large as a big room; one household in Phalodi had a tank that was
6.1 metres deep, 4.27 metres long and 2.44 metres wide. The tankas were part of the well- developed rooftop rainwater harvesting
Collect information about flood prone areas of the country
Reprint 2026-27
26 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
• Rooftop rainwater is collected using a PVC pipe
• Filtered using sand and bricks
• Underground pipe takes water to sump for immediate usage
• Excess water from the sump is taken to the well
• Water from the well recharges the underground
• Take water from the well (later)
(b) Recharge through Abandoned Dugwell
Fig 3.3:
Fig 3.3: Rooftop Rainwater Harvesting
The rainwater can be stored in the tankas tankas tankas tankas tankas till the next rainfall making it an extremely reliable source of drinking water when all other sources are dried up, particularly in the summers. Rainwater, or palar pani palar pani palar pani palar pani palar pani, as commonly referred to in these parts, is considered the purest form of natural water. Many houses constructed underground rooms adjoining the ‘tanka’ to beat the summer heat as it would keep the (a) Recharge through Hand Pump system and were built inside the main house or the courtyard. They were connected to the sloping roofs of the houses through a pipe.
Rain falling on the rooftops would travel down the pipe and was stored in these underground ‘tankas’. The first spell of rain was usually not collected as this would clean the roofs and the pipes. The rainwater from the subsequent showers was then collected.
Fig. 3.4
A kul leads to a circular village tank, as the above in the Kaza village, from which water is released as and when required.
Fig 3.5:
Fig 3.5: Traditional method of rainwater harvesting
Reprint 2026-27
27 WATER RESOURCES
Tamil Nadu is the first state in India which has made rooftop rainwater harvesting structure compulsory to all the houses across the state. There are legal provisions to punish the defaulters.
Rooftop rainwater harvesting is the most common practice in Shillong,
Meghalaya. It is interesting because
Cherapunjee and Mawsynram situated at a distance of 55 km. from Shillong receive the highest rainfall in the world, yet the state capital Shillong faces acute shortage of water. Nearly every household in the city has a rooftop rainwater harvesting structure. Nearly
15-25 per cent of the total water requirement of the household comes from rooftop water harvesting.
room cool.
Today, in western Rajasthan, sadly the practice of rooftop rainwater harvesting is on the decline as plenty of water is available due to the perennial Indira Gandhi Canal, though some houses still maintain the tankas since they do not like the taste of tap water.
Fortunately, in many parts of rural and urban
India, rooftop rainwater harvesting is being successfully adapted to store and conserve water. In Gendathur, a remote backward village in Mysuru, Karnataka, villagers have installed, in their household’s rooftop, rainwater harvesting system to meet their water needs. Nearly 200 households have installed this system and the village has earned the rare distinction of being rich in rainwater.
See Fig. 3.6 for a better understanding of the rooftop rainwater harvesting system which is adapted here. Gendathur receives an annual precipitation of 1,000 mm, and with 80 per cent of collection efficiency and of about 10 fillings, every house can collect and use about
50,000 litres of water annually. From the 200 houses, the net amount of rainwater harvested annually amounts to 1,00,000 litres.
Fig. 3.6
Rooftop harvesting was common across the towns and villages of the Thar. Rainwater that falls on the sloping roofs of houses is taken through a pipe into an underground tanka (circular holes in the ground). built in the main house or in the courtyard. The picture above shows water being taken from a neighbour’s roof through a long pipe.
Here the neighbour’s rooftop has been used for collection of rainwater. The picture shows a hole through which rainwater flows down into an underground
Find out other rainwater harvesting systems existing in and around your locality.
Reprint 2026-27
28 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
BAMBOO DRIP IRRIGATION SYSTEM
In Meghalaya, a 200-year-old system of tapping stream and spring water by using bamboo pipes, is prevalent.
About 18-20 litres of water enters the bamboo pipe system, gets transported over hundreds of metres, and finally reduces to 20-80 drops per minute at the site of the plant.
Picture 2 and 3: The channel sections, made of bamboo, divert water to the plant site where it is distributed into branches, again made and laid out with different forms of bamboo pipes. The flow of water into the pipes is controlled by manipulating the pipe positions.
Picture 1: Bamboo pipes are used to divert perennial springs on the hilltops to the lower reaches by gravity.
Picture 5 and 6
Reduced channel sections and diversion units are used at the last stage of water application. The last channel section enables water to be dropped near the roots of the plant.
Picture 4: If the pipes pass a road, they are taken high above the land.
1. Collect information on how industries are polluting our water resources.
2. Enact with your classmates a scene of water dispute in your locality.
Reprint 2026-27
