40 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
EXERCISES EXERCISES EXERCISES EXERCISES EXERCISES
1. Multiple choice questions.
(i) Which one of the following describes a system of agriculture where a single crop is grown on a large area?
(a) Shifting Agriculture (b) Plantation Agriculture (c) Horticulture (d) Intensive Agriculture (ii) Which one of the following is a rabi crop?
(a) Rice (b) Gram (c) Millets (d) Cotton (iii) Which one of the following is a leguminous crop?
(a) Pulses (b) Jawar (c) Millets (d) Sesamum
2. Answer the following questions in 30 words.
(i) Name one important beverage crop and specify the geographical conditions required for its growth.
(ii) Name one staple crop of India and the regions where it is produced.
(iii) Enlist the various institutional reform programmes introduced by the government in the interest of farmers.
3. Answer the following questions in about 120 words.
(i) Suggest the initiative taken by the government to ensure the increase in agricultural production.
(ii) Describe the geographical conditions required for the growth of rice.
PROJECT WORK
1. Group discussion on the necessity of literacy among farmers.
2. On an outline map of India show wheat producing areas.
Reprint 2026-27
41 AGRICULTURE
ACTIVITY
Solve the puzzle by following your search horizontally and vertically to find the hidden answers.
1 . The two staple food crops of India.
2 . This is the summer cropping season of India.
3 . Pulses like arhar, moong, gram, urad contain…
4 . It is a coarse grain.
5 . The two important beverages in India are…
6 . One of the four major fibers grown on black soils.
A Z M X N C B V N X A H D Q
S D E W S R J D Q J Z V R E
D K H A R I F G W F M R F W
F N L R G C H H R S B S V T
G B C W H E A T Y A C H B R
H R T K A S S E P H X A N W
J I E S J O W A R J Z H D T
K C L A E G A C O F F E E Y
L T E F Y M T A T S S R G I
P D E J O U Y V E J G F A U
O U M H Q S U D I T S W S P
U O A C O T T O N E A H F O
Y O L F L U S R Q Q D T W I
T M U A H R G Y K T R A B F
E A K D G D Q H S U O I W H
W Q Z C X V B N M K J A S L
Reprint 2026-27
We use different things in our daily life made from metal. Can you list a number of items used in your house made of metals. Where do these metals come from?
You have studied that the earth’s crust is made up of different minerals embedded in the rocks. Various metals are extracted from these minerals after proper refinement.
Minerals are an indispensable part of our lives. Almost everything we use, from a tiny pin to a towering building or a big ship, all are made from minerals. The railway lines and the tarmac (paving) of the roads, our implements and machinery too are made from minerals.
Cars, buses, trains, aeroplanes are manufactured from minerals and run on power resources derived from the earth. Even the food that we eat contains minerals. In all stages of development, human beings have used minerals for their livelihood, decoration, festivities, religious and ceremonial rites.
Haban comes to Guwahati with his father from a remote village.
He sees people getting into strange house like objects which move along the road. He also sees a “kitchen” dragging a number of house along with it. He is amazed and asked his father “Why don’t our houses move like the one we saw in Guwahati, Ba?”
Ba replies, “These are not houses, they are buses and trains. Unlike our houses these are not made of bricks and stones, metal like iron and alluminium are used in making these. They do not move on their own. They are driven by an engine which needs energy to work.”
A bright smile from toothpaste and minerals
Toothpaste cleans your teeth. Abrasive minerals like silica, limestone, aluminium oxide and various phosphate minerals do the cleaning. Fluoride which is used to reduce cavities, comes from a mineral fluorite. Most toothpaste are made white with titanium oxide, which comes from minerals called rutile, ilmenite and anatase. The sparkle in some toothpastes comes from mica. The toothbrush and tube containing the paste are made of plastics from petroleum. Find out where these minerals are found?
Dig a little deeper and find out how many minerals are used to make a light bulb?
All living things need minerals
Life processes cannot occur without minerals.
Although our mineral intake represents only about 0.3 per cent of our total intake of nutrients, they are so potent and so important that without them we would not be able to utilise the other 99.7 per cent of foodstuffs.
Dig a little deeper and collect “Nutritional
Facts” printed on food labels.
What is a mineral?
Geologists define mineral as a
“homogenous, naturally occurring substance with a definable internal structure.” Minerals are found in varied forms in nature, ranging from the hardest diamond to the softest talc.
Why are they so varied?
Reprint 2026-27
You have already learnt about rocks.
Rocks are combinations of homogenous substances called minerals. Some rocks, for instance limestone, consist of a single mineral only, but majority of the rock consist of several minerals in varying proportions. Although, over 2000 minerals have been identified, only a few are abundantly found in most of the
A particular mineral that will be formed from a certain combination of elements depends upon the physical and chemical conditions under which the material forms.
This, in turn, results in a wide range of colours, hardness, crystal forms, lustre and density that a particular mineral possesses. Geologists use these properties to classify the minerals.
Study of Minerals by Geographers and Geologists
Geographers study minerals as part of the earth’s crust for a better understanding of landforms. The distribution of mineral resources and associated economic activities are of interest to geographers. A geologist, however, is interested in the formation of minerals, their age and physical and chemical composition.
However, for general and commercial purposes minerals can be classified as under.
MODE OF OCCURRENCE OF MINERALS
Where are these minerals found?
Minerals are usually found in “ores”. The term ore is used to describe an accumulation of any mineral mixed with other elements.
The mineral content of the ore must be in sufficient concentration to make its extraction commercially viable. The type of formation or structure in which they are found determines the relative ease with which mineral ores may be mined. This also determines the cost of extraction. It is, therefore, important for us to understand the main types of formations in which minerals occur.
Minerals generally occur in these forms:
(i) In igneous and metamorphic rocks minerals may occur in the cracks, crevices, faults or joints. The smaller occurrences are called veins and the larger are called lodes. In most cases, they are formed when minerals in liquid/ molten and gaseous forms are forced upward through cavities towards the earth’s surface. They cool and solidify as they rise. Major metallic minerals like tin, copper, zinc and lead etc. are obtained from veins and lodes.
(ii) In sedimentary rocks a number of minerals occur in beds or layers. They have been formed as a result of deposition, accumulation and concentration in horizontal strata. Coal and some forms of iron ore have been concentrated as a result of long periods under great heat and pressure. Another group of sedimentary minerals include gypsum, potash salt and sodium salt. These are formed as a result of evaporation especially in arid regions.
(iii) Another mode of formation involves the decomposition of surface rocks, and the removal of soluble constituents, leaving a r e s i d u a l m a s s o f w e a t h e r e d material containing ores. Bauxite is formed this way.
43 MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES
Fig. 5.1
Reprint 2026-27
44 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Dig a little deeper: What is the difference between an open pit mine, a quarry and an underground mine with shafts?
Rat-Hole Mining. Do you know that most of the minerals in India are nationalised and their extraction is possible only after obtaining due permission from the government? But in most of the tribal areas of the north-east India, minerals are owned by individuals or communities. In
Meghalaya, there are large deposits of coal, iron ore, limestone and dolomite etc. Coal mining in Jowai and Cherapunjee is done by family member in the form of a long narrow tunnel, known as ‘Rat hole’ mining. The National Green Tribunal has declared such activities illegal and recommended that these should be stopped forthwith.
(iv) Certain minerals may occur as alluvial deposits in sands of valley floors and the base of hills. These deposits are called
‘placer deposits’ and generally contain minerals, which are not corroded by water.
Gold, silver, tin and platinum are most important among such minerals.
(v) The ocean waters contain vast quantities of minerals, but most of these are too widely diffused to be of economic significance.
However, common salt, magnesium and bromine are largely derived from ocean waters. The ocean beds, too, are rich in manganese nodules.
non-ferrous minerals. The vast alluvial plains of north India are almost devoid of economic minerals. These variations exist largely because of the differences in the geological structure, processes and time involved in the formation of minerals.
Let us now study the distribution of a few major minerals in India. Always remember that the concentration of mineral in the ore, the ease of extraction and closeness to the market play an important role in affecting the economic viability of a reserve. Thus, to meet the demand, a choice has to be made between a number of possible options. When this is done a mineral
‘deposit’ or ‘reserve’ turns into a mine.
Ferrous Minerals
Ferrous minerals account for about three- fourths of the total value of the production of metallic minerals. They provide a strong base for the development of metallurgical industries.
India exports substantial quantities of ferrous minerals after meeting her internal demands.
Iron Ore
Iron ore is the basic mineral and the backbone of industrial development. India is endowed with fairly abundant resources of iron ore. India is rich in good quality iron ores. Magnetite is the finest iron ore with a very high content of iron up to 70 per cent. It has excellent magnetic qualities, especially valuable in the electrical industry. Hematite ore is the most important industrial iron ore in terms of the quantity used, but has a slightly lower iron content than magnetite. (50-60 per cent). In 2018–19 almost entire production of iron ore (97%) accrued from Odisha, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka and
Jharkhand. The remaining production (3%)
was from other states.
India is fortunate to have fairly rich and varied mineral resources. However, these are unevenly distributed. Broadly speaking, peninsular rocks contain most of the reserves of coal, metallic minerals, mica and many other non-metallic minerals. Sedimentary rocks on the western and eastern flanks of the peninsula, in Gujarat and Assam have most of the petroleum deposits. Rajasthan with the rock systems of the peninsula, has reserves of many
Kudre in Kannada means horse. The highest peak in the western ghats of
Karnataka resembles the face of a horse.
The Bailadila hills look like the hump of an ox, and hence its name.
Reprint 2026-27
45 MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES
The major iron ore belts in India are:
• Odisha-Jharkhand belt: In Odisha high grade hematite ore is found in Badampahar mines in the Mayurbhanj and Kendujhar districts. In the adjoining Singbhum district of Jharkhand haematite iron ore is mined in Gua and Noamundi.
• Durg-Bastar-Chandrapur belt lies in
Chhattisgarh and Maharashtra. Very high grade hematites are found in the famous
Bailadila range of hills in the Bastar district of Chhattisgarh. The range of hills comprise of 14 deposits of super high grade hematite iron ore. It has the best physical properties needed for steel making. Iron ore from these mines is exported to Japan and South Korea via
Vishakhapatnam port.
• Ballari-Chitradurga-Chikkamagaluru-
Tumakuru belt in Karnataka has large reserves of iron ore. The Kudremukh mines located in the Western Ghats of Karnataka are a 100 per cent export unit. Kudremukh deposits are known to be one of the largest in the world. The ore is transported as slurry through a pipeline to a port near
Mangaluru.
• Maharashtra-Goa belt includes the state of Goa and Ratnagiri district of
Maharashtra. Though, the ores are not of very high quality, yet they are efficiently exploited. Iron ore is exported through
Marmagao port.
Manganese
Manganese is mainly used in the manufacturing of steel and ferro-manganese alloy. Nearly 10 kg of manganese is required to manufacture one tonne of steel. It is also used in manufacturing bleaching powder, insecticides and paints.
Fig. 5.2: Iron ore mine
Dig a little deeper: Superimpose the maps showing distribution of iron ore, manganese, coal and iron and steel industry. Do you see any correlation. Why?
Non-Ferrous Minerals
India’s reserves and production of non- ferrous minerals is not very satisfactory.
However, these minerals, which include copper, bauxite, lead, zinc and gold play a vital role in a number of metallurgical, engineering and electrical industries. Let us study the distribution of copper and bauxite.
Fig. 5.3: Production of Manganese showing state-wise share in per cent, 2018–19
Karnataka
Maharashtra
Reprint 2026-27
46 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
India: Distribution of Iron Ore, Manganese, Bauxite and Mica
Reprint 2026-27
47 MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES
India is critically deficient in the reserve and production of copper. Being malleable, ductile and a good conductor, copper is mainly used in electrical cables, electronics and chemical
Fig. 5.4:
Fig. 5.4: Copper mines at Malanjkhand
Fig. 5.5:
Fig. 5.5: Production of Bauxite showing state-wise share in per cent, 2018–19 industries. The Balaghat mines in Madhya
Pradesh, Khetri mines in Rajasthan and
Singhbhum district of Jharkhand are leading producers of copper.
Though, several ores contain aluminium, it is from bauxite, a clay-like substance that alumina and later aluminium is obtained. Bauxite deposits are formed by the decomposition of a wide variety of rocks rich in aluminium silicates.
Aluminium is an important metal because it combines the strength of metals such as iron, with extreme lightness and also with good conductivity and great malleability.
I ndia’s bauxite deposits are mainly found in the
Amarkantak plateau, Maikal hills and the plateau region of Bilaspur-Katni.
Odisha was the largest bauxite producing state in India in 2018-19. Panchpatmali deposits in Koraput district are the most important bauxite deposits in the state.
Dig a little deeper: Locate the mines of
Bauxite on the physical map of India.
Fig.5.6:
Fig.5.6: Bauxite Mine
Jharkhand
Chhattisgarh
Maharashtra
Reprint 2026-27
48 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Non-Metallic Minerals
Mica is a mineral made up of a series of plates or leaves. It splits easily into thin sheets. These sheets can be so thin that a thousand can be layered into a mica sheet of a few centimeters high. Mica can be clear, black, green, red yellow or brown. Due to its excellent di-electric strength, low power loss factor, insulating properties and resistance to high voltage, mica is one of the most indispensable minerals used in electric and electronic industries.
Mica deposits are found in the northern edge of the Chota Nagpur plateau. Koderma
Gaya – Hazaribagh belt of Jharkhand is the leading producer.
In Rajasthan, the major mica producing area is around Ajmer. Nellore mica belt of
Andhra Pradesh is also an important producer in the country.
Rock Minerals
Limestone is found in association with rocks composed of calcium carbonates or calcium and magnesium carbonates. It is found in sedimentary rocks of most geological formations. Limestone is the basic raw material for the cement industry and essential for smelting iron ore in the blast furnace.
Dig a little deeper: Study the maps to explain why Chota Nagpur is a storehouse of minerals.
Hazards of Mining
Have you ever wondered about the efforts the miners make in making life comfortable for you? What are the impacts of mining on the health of the miners and the environment?
The dust and noxious fumes inhaled by miners make them vulnerable to pulmonary diseases. The risk of collapsing mine roofs, inundation and fires in coalmines are a constant threat to miners.
The water sources in the region get contaminated due to mining. Dumping of waste and slurry leads to degradation of land, soil, and increase in stream and river pollution.
Fig. 5.8: Air pollution due to generation of dust in mining areas
After the discovery of aluminium
Emperor Napoleon III wore buttons and hooks on his clothes made of aluminium and served food to his more illustrious guests in aluminium utensils and the less honourable ones were served in gold and silver utensils. Thirty years after this incident aluminium bowls were most common with the beggars in Paris.
Fig. 5.7: Production of Limestone showing state-wise share in per cent, 2018–19
Reprint 2026-27
49 MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES
Stricter safety regulations and implementation of environmental laws are essential to prevent mining from becoming a
“killer industry”.
CONSERVATION OF MINERALS
We all appreciate the strong dependence of industry and agriculture upon mineral deposits and the substances manufactured from them. The total volume of workable mineral deposits is an insignificant fraction i.e. one per cent of the earth’s crust. We are rapidly consuming mineral resources that required millions of years to be created and concentrated. The geological processes of mineral formation are so slow that the rates of replenishment are infinitely small in comparison to the present rates of consumption. Mineral resources are, therefore, finite and non-renewable. Rich mineral deposits are our country’s extremely v
