52 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Jharkhand). Jharia, Raniganj, Bokaro are important coalfields. The Godavari,
Mahanadi, Son and Wardha valleys also contain coal deposits.
Tertiary coals occur in the north eastern states of Meghalaya, Assam, Arunachal
Pradesh and Nagaland.
Remember coal is a bulky material, which loses weight on use as it is reduced to ash.
Hence, heavy industries and thermal power stations are located on or near the coalfields.
Petroleum
Petroleum or mineral oil is the next major energy source in India after coal. It provides fuel for heat and lighting, lubricants for machinery and raw materials for a number of manufacturing industries. Petroleum refineries act as a “nodal industry” for synthetic textile, fertiliser and numerous chemical industries.
Most of the petroleum occurrences in India are associated with anticlines and fault traps in the rock formations of the tertiary age. In regions of folding, anticlines or domes, it occurs where oil is trapped in the crest of the upfold. The oil bearing layer is a porous limestone or sandstone through which oil may flow. The oil is prevented from rising or sinking by intervening non-porous layers.
Petroleum is also found in fault traps between porous and non-porous rocks. Gas, being lighter usually occurs above the oil.
Mumbai High, Gujarat and Assam are major petroleum production areas in India.
From the map locate the 3 major off shore fields of western India. Ankeleshwar is the most important field of Gujarat. Assam is the oldest oil producing state of India. Digboi,
Naharkatiya and Moran-Hugrijan are the important oil fields in the state.
Natural Gas
Natural Gas is found with petroleum deposits and is released when crude oil is brought to the surface. It can be used as a domestic and industrial fuel. It is used as fuel in power sector to generate electricity, for heating purpose in industries, as raw material in chemical, petrochemical and fertilizer industries, as transport fuel and as cooking fuel. With the expansion of gas infrastructure and local city gas distribution (COD) networks, natural gas is also emerging as a preferred transport fuel (CNG) and cooking fuel (PNG) at homes. India’s major gas reserves are found in the Mumbai
High and allied fields along the west coast which are supplemented by finds in the
Cambay basin. Along the East Coast, new reserves of natural gas have been discovered in the Krishna-Godavari basin.
The first 1,700 km long Hazira-Vijaipur-
Jagdishpur (HVJ) cross country gas pipeline, constructed by GAIL (India), linked Mumbai
High and Bassein gas fields with various fertilizer, power and industrial complexes in western and northen India. This artery provided impetus to Indian gas market development. Overall, India’s gas infrastructure has expanded over ten times from 1,700 km to 18,500 km of cross-country pipelines and is expected to soon reach over 34, 000 km as
Gas Grid by linking all gas sources and consuming markets across the country including North Eastern states.
Electricity
Electricity has such a wide range of applications in today’s world that, its percapita consumption is considered as an index of development. Electricity is generated mainly in two ways: by running water which drives hydro turbines to generate hydro electricity; and by burning other fuels such as coal, petroleum and natural gas to drive turbines to produce thermal power. Once generated the electricity is exactly the same.
Hydro electricity is generated by fast flowing water, which is a renewable resource.
India has a number of multi-purpose projects like the Bhakra Nangal, Damodar Valley corporation, the Kopili Hydel Project etc.
producing hydroelectric power.
Thermal electricity is generated by using coal, petroleum and natural gas. The thermal power stations use non-renewable fossil fuels for generating electricity.
Name some river valley projects and write the names of the dams built on these rivers.
Reprint 2026-27
53 MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES
India: Distribution of Nuclear and Thermal Power Plants
Rawat Bhata
Reprint 2026-27
54 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Collect information about thermal/hydel power plants located in your state. Show them on the map of India.
Non-Conventional Sources of Energy
The growing consumption of energy has resulted in the country becoming increasingly dependent on fossil fuels such as coal, oil and gas. Rising prices of oil and gas and their potential shortages have raised uncertainties about the security of energy supply in future, which in turn has serious repercussions on the growth of the national economy. Moreover, increasing use of fossil fuels also causes serious environmental problems. Hence, there is a pressing need to use renewable energy sources like solar energy, wind, tide, biomass and energy from waste material. These are called non-conventional energy sources.
India is blessed with an abundance of sunlight, water, wind and biomass. It has the largest programmes for the development of these renewable energy resources.
Nuclear or Atomic Energy
It is obtained by altering the structure of atoms. When such an alteration is made, much energy is released in the form of heat and this is used to generate electric power. Uranium and
Thorium, which are available in Jharkhand and the Aravalli ranges of Rajasthan are used for generating atomic or nuclear power. The
Monazite sands of Kerala is also rich in
Thorium.
Locate the 6 nuclear power stations and find out the state in which they are located.
Solar Energy
India is a tropical country. It has enormous possibilities of tapping solar energy.
Photovoltaic technology converts sunlight directly into electricity. Solar energy is fast becoming popular in rural and remote areas.
Some big solar power plants are being established in different parts of India which will minimise the dependence of rural households on firewood and dung cakes, which in turn will contribute to environmental conservation and adequate supply of manure in agriculture.
Fig. 5.10: Solar operated electronic milk testing equipment
Fig. 5.11: Wind mills – Nagarcoil
Wind power
India has great potential of wind power. The largest wind farm cluster is located in Tamil
Nadu from Nagarcoil to Madurai. Apart from these, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Gujarat,
Kerala, Maharashtra and Lakshadweep have important wind farms. Nagarcoil and
Jaisalmer are well known for effective use of wind energy in the country.
Shrubs, farm waste, animal and human waste are used to produce biogas for domestic consumption in rural areas. Decomposition of organic matter yields gas, which has higher thermal efficiency in comparison to kerosene, dung cake and charcoal. Biogas plants are set up at municipal, cooperative and individual levels. The plants using cattle dung are known as ‘Gobar gas plants’ in rural India.
These provide twin benefits to the farmer in the form of energy and improved quality of
Collect information about newly established solar power plants in India.
Reprint 2026-27
55 MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES geothermal gradient is high, high temperatures are found at shallow depths. Groundwater in such areas absorbs heat from the rocks and becomes hot. It is so hot that when it rises to the earth’s surface, it turns into steam. This steam is used to drive turbines and generate electricity.
There are several hundred hot springs in
India, which could be used to generate electricity. Two experimental projects have been set up in India to harness geothermal energy.
One is located in the Parvati valley near
Manikaran in Himachal Pradesh and the other is located in the Puga Valley, Ladakh.
Conservation of Energy Resources
Energy is a basic requirement for economic development. Every sector of the national economy – agriculture, industry, transport, commercial and domestic – needs inputs of energy. The economic development plans implemented since Independence necessarily required increasing amounts of energy to remain operational. As a result, consumption of energy in all forms has been steadily rising all over the country.
In this background, there is an urgent need to develop a sustainable path of energy development. Promotion of energy conservation and increased use of renewable energy sources are the twin planks of sustainable energy.
India is presently one of the least energy efficient countries in the world. We have to adopt a cautious approach for the judicious use of our limited energy resources. For example, as concerned citizens we can do our bit by using public transport systems instead of individual vehicles; switching off electricity when not in use, using power-saving devices and using non-conventional sources of energy.
After all, “energy saved is energy produced”.
manure. Biogas is by far the most efficient use of cattle dung. It improves the quality of manure and also prevents the loss of trees and manure due to burning of fuel wood and cow dung cakes.
EXERCISES EXERCISES EXERCISES EXERCISES EXERCISES
1. Multiple choice questions.
(i) Which one of the following minerals is formed by decomposition of rocks, leaving a residual mass of weathered material?
(a) coal (b) bauxite (c) gold (d) zinc (ii) Koderma, in Jharkhand is the leading producer of which one of the following minerals?
(a) bauxite (b) mica (c) iron ore (d) copper
Tidal Energy
Oceanic tides can be used to generate electricity. Floodgate dams are built across inlets. During high tide water flows into the inlet and gets trapped when the gate is closed.
After the tide falls outside the flood gate, the water retained by the floodgate flows back to the sea via a pipe that carries it through a power-generating turbine.
In India the Gulf of Khambhat, the Gulf of Kuchchh in Gujarat on the western coast and Gangetic delta in Sunderban regions of
West Bengal provide ideal conditions for utilising tidal energy.
Geo Thermal Energy
Geo thermal energy refers to the heat and electricity produced by using the heat from the interior of the Earth. Geothermal energy exists because, the Earth grows progressively hotter with increasing depth. Where the
Fig. 5.12: Biogas Plant
Reprint 2026-27
56 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II (iii) Minerals are deposited and accumulated in the stratas of which of the following rocks?
(a) sedimentary rocks (c) igneous rocks (b) metamorphic rocks (d) none of the above (iv) Which one of the following minerals is contained in the Monazite sand?
(a) oil (b) uranium (c) thorium (d) coal
2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) Distinguish between the following in not more than 30 words.
(a) ferrous and non-ferrous minerals (b) conventional and non-conventional sources of energy (ii) What is a mineral?
(iii) How are minerals formed in igneous and metamorphic rocks?
(iv) Why do we need to conserve mineral resources ?
3. Answer the following questions in about 120 words.
(i) Describe the distribution of coal in India.
(ii) Why do you think that solar energy has a bright future in India?
ACTIVITY
Fill the name of the correct mineral in the crossword below:
Reprint 2026-27
57 MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES
1. Found in placer deposit (4)
2. Iron ore mined in Bailadila (8)
3. Indispensable for electrical industry (4)
4. Geological Age of coal found in north east
India (8)
5. Formed in veins and lodes (3)
1. A ferrous mineral (9)
2. Raw material for cement industry (9)
3. Finest iron ore with magnetic properties (9)
4. Highest quality hard coal (10)
5. Aluminium is obtained from this ore (7)
6. Khetri mines are famous for this mineral (6)
7. Formed due to evaporation (6)
Reprint 2026-27
58 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Production of goods in large quantities after processing from raw materials to more valuable products is called manufacturing. Do you know that paper is manufactured from wood, sugar from sugarcane, iron and steel from iron ore and aluminium from bauxite?
Do you also know that some types of clothes are manufactured from yarn which itself is an industrial product?
People employed in the secondary activities manufacture the primary materials into finished goods. The workers employed in steel factories, car, breweries, textile industries, bakeries etc. fall into this category. Some people are employed in providing services. In this chapter, we are mainly concerned with manufacturing industries which fall in the secondary sector.
The economic strength of a country is measured by the development of manufacturing industries.
IMPORTANCE OF MANUFACTURING
Manufacturing sector is considered the backbone of development in general and economic development in particular mainly because–
• Manufacturing industries not only help in modernising agriculture, which forms the backbone of our economy, they also reduce the heavy dependence of people on agricultural income by providing them jobs in secondary and tertiary sectors.
• Industrial development is a precondition for eradication of unemployment and poverty from our country. This was the main philosophy behind public sector industries and joint sector ventures in India. It was also aimed at bringing down regional disparities by establishing industries in tribal and backward areas.
• Export of manufactured goods expands trade and commerce, and brings in much needed foreign exchange.
• Countries that transform their raw materials into a wide variety of finished goods of higher value are prosperous.
India’s prosperity lies in increasing and diversifying its manufacturing industries as quickly as possible.
Agriculture and industry are not exclusive of each other. They move hand in hand. For instance, the agro-industries in India have given a major boost to agriculture by raising its productivity. They depend on the latter for raw materials and sell their products such as irrigation pumps, fertilisers, insecticides, pesticides, plastic and PVC pipes, machines and tools, etc. to the farmers. Thus, development and competitiveness of
On the occassion of Diwali, Harish went to a market with his parents. They purchased shoes and clothes for him. His mother purchased utensils, sugar, tea and diyas (earthen lamps). Harish observed that the shops in the market were flooded with items for sale. He wondered how so many items could be made in such large quantities. His father explained that shoes, clothes, sugar etc. are manufactured by machines in large industries, some utensils are manufactured in small industries, while items like diyas are made by individual artisans in household industry.
Do you have some ideas about these industries?
Reprint 2026-27
59 MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES
Classification of Industries
List the various manufactured products you use in your daily life such as – transistors, electric bulbs, vegetable oil, cement, glassware, petrol, matches, scooters, automobiles, medicines and so on. If we classify the various industries based on a particular criterion then we would be able to understand their manufacturing better. Industries may be classified as follows:
On the basis of source of raw materials
• Agro based: cotton, woollen, jute, silk textile, rubber and sugar, tea, coffee, edible oil.
• Mineral based: iron and steel, cement, aluminium, machine tools, petrochemicals.
According to their main role:
• Basic or key industries are those which supply their products as raw materials to manufacture other goods e.g. iron and steel and copper smelting, aluminum smelting.
• Consumer industries that produce goods for direct use by consumers – sugar, toothpaste, paper, sewing machines, fans etc.
On the basis of capital investment:
• A small scale industry is defined with reference to the maximum investment allowed on the assets of a unit. This limit has changed over a period of time. At present the maximum investment allowed is rupees one crore.
On the basis of ownership:
• Public sector, owned and operated by government agencies – BHEL, SAIL etc.
• Private sector industries owned and operated by individuals or a group of individuals –TISCO, Bajaj Auto Ltd.,
Dabur Industries.
• Joint sector industries which are jointly run by the state and individuals or a group of individuals. Oil India Ltd. (OIL) is jointly owned by public and private sector.
• Cooperative sector industries are owned and operated by the producers or suppliers of raw materials, workers or both. They pool in the resources and share the profits or losses proportionately. Such examples are the sugar industry in
Maharashtra, the coir industry in Kerala.
Based on the bulk and weight of raw material and finished goods:
• Heavy industries such as iron and steel
• Light industries that use light raw materials and produce light goods such as electrical goods industries.
Classify the following into two groups on the basis of bulk and weight of raw material and finished goods.
(i) Oil (vi) Sewing Machines (ii) Knitting needles (vii) Shipbuilding (iii) Brassware (viii) Electric Bulbs (iv) Fuse wires (ix) Paint brushes (v) Watches (x) Automobiles
Agro-based Industries
Cotton, jute, silk, woollen textiles, sugar and edible oil, etc. industries are based on agricultural raw materials.
manufacturing industry has not only assisted agriculturists in increasing their production but also made the production processes very efficient.
In the present day world of globalisation, our industry needs to be more efficient and competitive. Self-sufficiency alone is not enough. Our manufactured goods must be a t p a r i n q u a l i t y w i t h t h o s e i n t h e international market. Only then, will we be able to compete in the international market.
Reprint 2026-27
60 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Textile Industry: The textile industry occupies unique position in the Indian economy, because it contributes significantly to industrial production, employment generation and foreign exchange earnings. It is the only industry in the country, which is self-reliant and complete in the value chain i.e., from raw material to the highest value added products.
Cotton Textiles: In ancient India, cotton textiles were produced
