68 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II o f c o a l i n f a c t o r i e s . M a c h i n e r y a n d equipment can be used and generators should be fitted with silencers. Almost all machinery can be redesigned to increase energy efficiency and reduce noise. Noise absorbing material may be used apart from personal use of earplugs and earphones.
The challenge of sustainable development requires integration of economic development with environmental concerns.
(a) Optimum utilisation of equipment adopting latest techniques and upgrading existing equipment.
(b) Minimising waste generation by maximising ash utilisation.
(c) Providing green belts for nurturing ecological balance and addressing the question of special purpose vehicles for afforestation.
(d) Reducing environmental pollution through ash pond management, ash water recycling system and liquid waste management.
(e) Ecological monitoring, reviews and on-line database management for all its power stations.
Fig. 6.8: Ramagundam plant
Fig. 6.7: Sewage Treatment plant under Yamuna action plan at Faridabad
NTPC shows the way
NTPC is a major power providing corporation in India. It has ISO certification for EMS (Environment Management System) 14001.
The corporation has a proactive approach for preserving the natural environment and resources like water, oil and gas and fuels in places where it is setting up power plants.
This has been possible through-
EXERCISES EXERCISES EXERCISES EXERCISES EXERCISES
1. Multiple choice questions.
(i) Which one of the following industries uses bauxite as a raw material?
(a) Aluminium Smelting (b) Cement (c) Paper (d) Steel (ii) Which one of the following industries manufactures telephones, computer, etc.
(a) Steel (c) Aluminium Smelting (b) Electronic (d) Information Technology
2. Answer the following briefly in not more than 30 words.
(i) What is manufacturing?
(ii) What are basic industries? Give an example.
Reprint 2026-27
69 MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES
3. Write the answers of the following questions in 120 words.
(i) How do industries pollute the environment?
(ii) Discuss the steps to be taken to minimise environmental degradation by industry?
ACTIVITY
Give one word for each of the following with regard to industry. The number of letters in each word are hinted in brackets.
(i) Used to drive machinery (5) P...........................
(ii) People who work in a factory (6) W..........................
(iii) Where the product is sold (6) M..........................
(iv) A person who sells goods (8) R...........................
(v) Thing produced (7) P...........................
(vi) To make or produce (11) M..........................
(vii) Land, Water and Air degraded (9) P...........................
PROJECT WORK
Select one agro-based and one mineral-based industry in your area.
(i) What are the raw materials they use?
(ii) What are the other inputs in the process of manufacturing that involve transportation cost?
(iii) Are these factories following environmental norms?
ACTIVITY
Solve the puzzle by following your search horizontally and vertically to find the hidden answers.
1. Textiles, sugar, vegetable oil and plantation industries deriving raw materials from agriculture are called…
2. The basic raw material for sugar industry.
3. This fibre is also known as the ‘Golden Fibre’.
4. Iron-ore, coking coal, and limestone are the chief raw materials of this industry.
5. A public sector steel plant located in Chhattisgarh.
Reprint 2026-27
70 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
G G G P V A R A N A S I
U O J I P G X K M Q W V
K S U G A R C A N E E N
O T T O N O Z V O P T R
A U E L U B H I L A I U
T K O C R A Q N T R L N
E I R O N S T E E L S J
E N A N O E P I T L R Y
G A N U J D R A G D T A
N T A R P O A P U E P Y
A S N A E N J D I Y S K
S M H V L I A J H S K G
ACTIVITY
Solve the puzzle by following your search horizontally and vertically to find the hidden answers.
1. Textiles, sugar, vegetable oil and plantation industries deriving raw materials from agriculture are called…
2. The basic raw material for sugar industry.
3. This fibre is also known as the ‘Golden Fibre’.
4. Iron-ore, coking coal, and limestone are the chief raw materials of this industry.
5. A public sector steel plant located in Chhattisgarh.
6. Railway diesel engines are manufactured in Uttar Pradesh at this place.
Reprint 2026-27
We use different materials and services in our daily life. Some of these are available in our immediate surroundings, while other requirements are met by bringing things from other places. Goods and services do not move from supply locales to demand locales on their own. The movement of these goods and services from their supply locations to demand locations necessitates the need for transport. Some people are engaged in facilitating these movements.
These are known to be traders who make the products come to the consumers by transportation. Thus, the pace of development of a country depends upon the production of goods and services as well as their movement over space. Therefore, efficient means of transport are prerequisites for fast development.
Movement of these goods and services can be over three important domains of our earth i.e. land, water and air. Based on these, transport can also be classified into land, water and air transport.
the help of equally developed communication system. Therefore, transport, communication and trade are complementary to each other.
Today, India is well-linked with the rest of the world despite its vast size, diversity and linguistic and socio-cultural plurality.
Railways, airways, waterways, newspapers, radio, television, cinema and internet, etc. have been contributing to its socio-economic progress in many ways. The trades from local to international levels have added to the vitality of its economy. It has enriched our life and added substantially to growing amenities and facilities for the comforts of life.
In this chapter, you will see how modern means of transport and communication serve as lifelines of our nation and its modern economy. It is thus, evident that a dense and efficient network of transport and communication is a prerequisite for local, national and global trade of today.
Fig. 7.1
For a long time, trade and transport were restricted to a limited space. With the development in science and technology, the area of influence of trade and transport expanded far and wide. Today, the world has been converted into a large village with the help of efficient and fast moving transport.
Transport has been able to achieve this with
TRANSPORT
Roadways
India has second largest road networks in the world, aggregating to about 62.16 lakh km (2020–21). In India, roadways have preceded railways. They still have an edge over railways in view of the ease with which they can be built
Reprint 2026-27
72 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II and maintained. The growing importance of road transport vis-à-vis rail transport is rooted in the following reasons; (a)
construction cost of roads is much lower than that of railway lines, (b) roads can traverse comparatively more dissected and undulating topography, (c) roads can negotiate higher gradients of slopes and as such can traverse mountains such as the
Himalayas, (d) road transport is economical in transportation of f e w p e r s o n s a n d relatively smaller amount of goods over short distances, (e) it also provides door - to-door service, thus the cost of loading and unloading is much lower, (f) road transport is also used as a feeder to other modes of transport such as they provide a link between railway stations, air and sea ports.
In India, roads are classified in the following six classes according to their capacity. Look at the map of the National
Highways and find out about the significant role played by these roads.
Golden Quadrilateral Super Highways:
The government has launched a major road development project linking Delhi-
Kolkata-Chennai-Mumbai and Delhi by six-lane Super Highways. The North-
South corridors linking Srinagar (Jammu
& Kashmir) and Kanniyakumari (Tamil
N a d u ) , a n d E a s t - We s t C o r r i d o r connecting Silchar (Assam) and Porbander (Gujarat) are part of this project. The major objective of these Super Highways is to reduce the time and distance between the mega cities of India. These highway projects are being implemented by the National Highway Authority of
India (NHAI).
National Highways: National Highways link extreme parts of the country. These are the primary road systems. A number of major National Highways run in North-
South and East-West directions.
State Highways: Roads linking a state capital with different district headquarters are known as State Highways.
District Roads: These roads connect the district headquarters with other places of the district.
Other Roads: Rural roads, which link rural areas and villages with towns, are classified under this category. These roads received special impetus under the Pradhan Mantri
Grameen Sadak Yojana. Under this scheme special provisions are made so that every village in the country is linked to a major town in the country by an all season motorable road.
Border Roads: Apart from these, Border
Roads Organisation a Government of India undertaking constructs and maintains roads in the bordering areas of the country. This organisation was established in 1960 for the development of the roads of strategic importance in the northern and north-eastern border areas. These roads have improved accessibility in areas of difficult terrain and have helped in the economic development of these area.
Fig.7.2: Ahmedabad- Vadodara Expressway
Collect information of National Highway numbers (old and new) from the website morth.nic.in/national-highway-details. The historical Sher-Shah Suri Marg between
Delhi and Amritsar is known by which
National Highway ?
Reprint 2026-27
73 LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY
India: National Highways
Reprint 2026-27
74 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Roads can also be classified on the basis of the type of material used for their construction such as metalled and unmetalled roads.
Metalled roads may be made of cement, concrete or even bitumen of coal, therefore, these are all weather roads. Unmetalled roads go out of use in the rainy season.
Railways
R a i l w a y s a r e t h e p r i n c i p a l m o d e o f transportation for freight and passengers in India. Railways also make it possible for people to conduct multifarious activities like business, sightseeing, pilgrimage along with transportation of goods over longer distances. Apart from an important means of transport the Indian Railways have been a great integrating force for more than 150 years. Railways in India bind the economic life of the country as well as accelerate the development of the industry and agriculture.
The Indian Railway is now reorganised into
17 zones.
The World’s longest Highway tunnel-Atal
Tunnel (9.02 Km) has been built by Border
Road Organisation. This tunnel connects
Manali to Lahul-Spiti valley throughout the year. Earlier the valley was cut off for about
6 months each year owing to heavy snowfall.
The tunnel is buit with ultra-modern specifications in the Pir Panjal range of
Himalayas at an altitude of 3000 metres from the Mean Sea Level (MSL).
Source: http://www.bro.gov.in/pagefimg.
asp?imid=144,And PIBdelhi03October2020
Fig. 7.3: Hilly Tracts
Fig. 7.4: Traffic on north-eastern border road (Arunachal Pradesh)
The distribution pattern of the Railway network in the country has been largely influenced by physiographic, economic and administrative factors. The northern plains with their vast level land, high population density and rich agricultural resources provided the most favourable condition for their growth. However, a large number of rivers requiring construction of bridges across their wide beds posed some obstacles. In the hilly terrains of the peninsular region, railway tracts are laid through low hills, gaps or tunnels. The Himalayan mountainous regions too are unfavourable for the construction of railway lines due to high relief, sparse population and lack of economic opportunities.
Likewise, it was difficult to lay railway lines on the sandy plain of western Rajasthan, swamps of Gujarat, forested tracks of Madhya Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh, Odisha and Jharkhand. The contiguous stretch of Sahyadri could be crossed
The Indian Railways is the largest public sector undertaking in the country. The first train steamed off from Mumbai to Thane in
1853, covering a distance of 34 km.
Find out the current Railway zones and their headquarters. Also locate the headquarters of Railway zones on the map of India.
Reprint 2026-27
75 LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY
• From oil field in upper Assam to Kanpur (Uttar Pradesh), via Guwahati, Barauni and
Prayagraj. It has branches from Barauni to
Haldia, via Rajbandh, Rajbandh to
Maurigram and Guwahati to Siliguri.
• From Salaya in Gujarat to Jalandhar in
Punjab, via Viramgam, Mathura, Delhi and
Sonipat. It has branches to connect Koyali (near Vadodara, Gujarat) Chakshu and other places.
• The first 1,700 km long Hazira-Vijaipur-
Jagdishpur (HVJ) cross country gas pipeline, linked Mumbai High and Bassein gas fields with various ferilizer, power and industrial complexes in western and northern India. Overall, India’s gas pipeline infrastructure has expanded from 1,700 km to 18,500 km of cross-country pipelines.
Waterways
Since the ancient period, India was one of the seafaring countries. Its seamen sailed far and near, thus, carrying and spreading Indian commerce and culture. Waterways are the cheapest means of transport. They are most suitable for carrying heavy and bulky goods. It is a fuel-efficient and environment friendly mode of transport. India has inland navigation waterways of 14,500 km in length. In order to create wide waterways network and to promote inland water transport in the country as an economical environment friendly supplementary mode of transport to rail and road, 111 inland waterways (including 5
National Waterways declared earlier) were declared as National Waterways (NWs) by the
National Waterways Act, 2016. (Source: Annual
Report, Ministry of Ports, Shipping &
Waterways, Government of India, 2022-23).
only through gaps or passes (Ghats). In recent times, the development of the Konkan railway along the west coast has facilitated the movement of passengers and goods in this most important economic region of India. It has also faced a number of problem such as sinking of track in some stretches and landslides.
Today, the railways have become more important in our national economy than all other means of transport put together. However, rail transport suffers from certain problems as well. Many passengers travel without tickets.
Thefts and damaging of railway property has not yet stopped completely. People stop the trains, pull the chain unnecessarily and this causes heavy damage to the railway. Think over it, how we can help our railway in running as per the scheduled time?
Pipelines
Pipeline transport network is a new arrival on the transportation map of India. In the past, these were used to transport water to cities and industries. Now, these are used for transporting crude oil, petroleum products and natural gas from oil and natural gas fields to refineries, fertilizer factories and big thermal power plants.
Solids can also be transported through a pipeline when converted into slurry. The far inland locations of refineries like Barauni,
Mathura, Panipat and gas based fertilizer plants could be thought of only because of pipelines.
Initial cost of laying pipelines is high but subsequent running costs are minimal. It rules out trans-shipment losses or delays.
There are three important networks of pipeline transportation in the country.
Source: Railway Yearbook 2019–20, Ministry of Railways, Government of India.
Website: www.indianrailways.gov.in
Table 7.1: India: Railway Track
The Indian Railway network runs on multiple gauge operations extending over 67,956 km.
Gauge in metres Route (Km)
Broad Gauge (1.676) 63950
Metre Gauge (1.000) 2,402
Narrow Gauge (0.762 and 0.610) 1,604
Total 67,956
Reprint 2026-27
76 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Activity
Railway line has been extended from Banihal to Baramula in the Kashmir Valley. Locate these two towns on the map of India.
Reprint 2026-27
77 LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY
Fig. 7.5: Inland waterways widely used in north-eastern states
• The Ganga river between Prayagraj and
Haldia (1620 km)-N.W. No.1
• The Brahmaputra river between Sadiya and
Dhubri (891 km)-N.W. No.2
• The West-Coast Canal in Kerala (Kottapurma-Kollam, Udyogamandal and
Champakkara canals-205 km) – N.W. No.3
• Specified stretches of Godavari and Krishna rivers along with Kakinada Puducherry stretch of canals (1078 km) – N.W. No.4
• Specified stretches of river Brahmani along with Matai river, delta channels of Mahanadi and Brahmani rivers and East Coast Canal (588 km) – N.W. No.5
There are some other inland water ways on which substantial transportation takes place. These are Mandavi, Zuari and
Cumberjua, Sunderbans, Barak and backwaters of Kerala.
Apart from these, India’s trade with foreign countries is carried from the ports located along the coast. 95 per cent of the country’s trade volume (68 per cent in terms of value) is moved
Deendayal Port, is a tidal port. It caters to the convenient handling of exports and imports of highly productive granary and industrial belt stretching across UT of Jammu and Kashmir, and the states of Himachal Pradesh, Punjab,
Haryana, Rajasthan and Gujarat.
Major Sea Ports
With a long coastline of 11098.81 km, India is dotted with 12 major and 200 notified non- majors (minor/intermediate) ports. These major ports handle 95 per cent of India’s foreign trade.
Deendayal Port (Kandla) in Kuchchh was the first port developed soon after
Independence to ease the volume of trade on the Mumbai port, in the wake of loss of
Karachi port to Pakistan after the Partition.
Moving along the eas
