71/ONE CENTIMETRE
One Centimetre One Centimetre One Centimetre One Centimetre One Centimetre
Bi Shu-min has been serving her country, China, as a doctor for over twenty years. She also has a
Master’s degree in literature from the Beijing Teacher’s
College.
Bi Shu-min is one of the best known writers currently working in China. Her works have been translated into many languages. She has won innumerable literary awards both in China and in Taiwan. ‘One
Centimetre’ is a fine example of a mature artist working at the height of her powers.
When Tao Ying rides on the bus alone, quite often she does not bother to buy a ticket.
Why should she? Without her, the bus would still be stopping at every stop, a driver and a conductor would still have to be employed, and the same amount of petrol
Clearly Tao Ying has to be astute. When the bus conductor looked like the responsible type, she would buy a ticket as soon as she got on board. But if he appeared to be casual and careless, she would not dream of paying, considering it a small punishment for him and a little saving for herself.
Tao Ying works as a cook in the canteen of a factory.
She spends all day next to an open fire, baking screw- shaped wheat cakes with sesame butter.
Today she is with her son Xiao Ye. She follows him onto the bus. As the doors shut her jacket is caught, ballooning up like a tent behind her. She twists this way and that, finally wrenching herself free.
5 5 5 5 5
Bi Shu-min
Born 1952
Reprint 2026-27
72/KALEIDOSCOPE
‘Mama, tickets!’ Xiao Ye says. Children are often more conscious of rituals than adults. Without a ticket in his hand, the ride doesn’t count as a proper ride.
On the peeling paint of the door somebody has painted the shape of a pale finger. It points at a number: 1.10 m.
Xiao Ye pushed through. His hair looks as fluffy as a bundle of straw—dry and without lustre. As a rule, Tao
Ying is very careful with her purse, but she has never skimped on her child’s diet. Nonetheless the goodness in his food refuses to advance beyond his hairline. As a result
Xiao Ye is healthy and clever, but his hair is a mess.
Tao Ying tries to smooth it down, as if she was brushing away topsoil to get to a firm foundation. She can feel the softness of her son’s skull, rubbery and elastic to the touch.
Apparently there is a gap on the top of everyone’s head, where the two halves meet. If they don’t meet properly, a person can end up with a permanently gaping mouth. Even when the hemispheres are a perfect match, it still takes a while for them to seal. This is the door to life itself—if it remains open, the world outside will feel like water, flowing into the body through this slit. Every time Tao Ying happens upon this aperture on her son’s head, she would be overwhelmed by a sense of responsibility. It was she who had brought this delicate creature into the world after all. Although she senses her own insignificance in the world, that her existence makes no difference to anyone else, she also realises that to this little boy she is the centre of the universe and she must try to be the most perfect, flawless mother possible.
Between Xiao Ye’s round head and the tip of the painted digit setting out the height requirement for a ticket rests the beautiful slender fingers of Tao Ying. Since she is in contact with oil all day, her nails are shiny, glistening like the smooth curved back of a sea shell.
‘Xiao Ye, you are not quite tall enough, still one centimetre away,’ she tells him softly. Tao Ying does not come from a privileged background, and has not read very many books. But she likes to be gentle and gracious, to set an example for her son and make a good impression. This
Reprint 2026-27
73/ONE CENTIMETRE elevates her sense of self-worth and makes her feel like an aristocrat.
‘Mama! I’m tall enough, I’m tall enough!’ Xiao Ye shouts at the top of his voice, stamping on the floor as if it were a tin drum. ‘You told me the last time I could have a ticket the next time, this is the next time. You don’t keep your word!’ He looks up at his mother angrily.
Tao Ying looks down at her son. A ticket costs twenty cents. Twenty cents is not to be scoffed at. It can buy a cucumber, two tomatoes or, at a reduced price, three bunches of radishes or enough spinach to last four days.
But Xiao Ye’s face is raised up like a half-open blossom, waiting to receive his promise from the sun.
‘Get in! Don’t block the entrance! This is not a train, where you stand from Beijing to Bao Ding. We’re almost at the next stop...!’ the conductor bellows.
Normally, an outburst like this would certainly have discouraged Tao Ying from buying a ticket. But today she says, ‘Two tickets, please.’
The fierce conductor has beady eyes. ‘This child is one centimetre short of requiring a ticket.’
Xiao Ye shrinks, not just one but several centimetres— the need for a ticket has all of a sudden become interwoven with the pride of a small child.
To be able to purchase self-esteem with twenty cents is something that can only happen in childhood and certainly no mother can resist an opportunity to make her son happy.
‘I would like to buy two tickets,’ she says politely.
Xiao Ye holds the two tickets close to his lips and blows, making a sound like a paper windmill.
They had entered through the central doors of the bus, but alight towards the front. Here another conductor is poised to examine their tickets. Tao Ying thinks that this man can’t be very bright. What mother accompanied by a child would try to avoid paying the correct fare? However poor she would never have allowed herself to lose face in front of her own son.
Reprint 2026-27
74/KALEIDOSCOPE
She hands over the tickets nonchalantly. The conductor asks: ‘Are you going to claim these back?’ ‘No.’ In fact Tao
Ying ought to have kept the tickets so that the next time there is a picnic or an outing at work she could use her bicycle and then claim back the fare with the stubs. Both she and her husband are blue-collar workers, and any saving would have been a help. But Xiao Ye is a smart boy, and might well question her aloud, ‘Mama, can we claim back tickets even when we are on a private outing?’ In front of the child, she would never lie.
It is exhausting to follow rules dictated by parental guide-books all the time, but Tao Ying is determined to be the ideal mother and create a perfect example for her son to look up to. She needs really to concentrate—living this way is not unlike carrying an audience with you wherever you go. But her actions are full of love and tenderness. For instance, whenever she eats a watermelon in front of Xiao
Ye, she would take care not to bite too close to the rind even though she doesn’t actually think there is much difference between the flesh and the skin. True, the sweetness gradually diminishes as you work your way through the red towards the green, but every part of the melon is equally refreshing. In any case the skin of a melon is supposed to have a beneficial cooling effect, and is often used as medicine.
One day, she came across her son eating a melon in the same manner she did. When Xiao Ye looked up, Tao
Ying could see a white melon seed stuck to his forehead.
She was furious: ‘Who taught you to gnaw at a melon like that? Are you going to wash your face in it too?’ Xiao Ye was terrified. The small hand holding the melon began to tremble, but the big round eyes remained defiant.
Children are the best imitators in the world. From then on Tao Ying realised that if she wanted her son to behave as if he were the product of a cultured home, then she must concentrate and never fail in her own example.
This was very difficult, like ‘shooting down aeroplanes with a small gun’—but with determination, she knew that nothing was impossible. With this clear objective in mind,
Reprint 2026-27
75/ONE CENTIMETRE
Tao Ying found her life becoming more focused, more challenging.
Stop and Think Stop and Think Stop and Think Stop and Think Stop and Think
1. What made Tao Ying decide whether to buy a ticket or not when she rode a bus alone?
2. Why did she insist on buying tickets both for herself and her son that day?
Today she is taking Xiao Ye to visit a big temple. He has never seen the Buddha before. Tao Ying is not a believer and she does not intend to ask him to kow-tow. That is superstition, she knows.
The tickets cost five dollars a piece—these days even temples are run like businesses. Tao Ying’s ticket was a gift from Lao Chiang, who worked at the meat counter. The ticket was valid for a month, and today was the last day.
Lao Chiang was one of those people who seemed to know everybody. Occasionally he would produce a battered coverless month-old magazine and say: ‘Seen this before?
This is called the Big Reference, not meant for the eyes of the common people.’ Tao Ying had never seen anything like this before and wondered how such a small rag, smaller even than a regular newspaper, could be called a Big
Reference. She asked Lao Chiang but he seemed confused.
He said everybody called it that—perhaps if you were to take out the pages and laid them flat they would end up bigger than a normal newspaper. It seemed to make sense.
Studying this publication written in large print, Tao Ying could see that it was full of speculation about the war in the Middle East. Foremost on everyone’s mind seemed to be whether the export of dates from Iraq to China would continue as it did in the sixties during the famine. In any case, Tao Ying was full of admiration for Lao Chiang. In return for her indiscriminate respect, Lao Chiang decided to reward her with a ticket for the temple. ‘Is there just the one?’ Tao asked, not without gratitude but with some uncertainty. ‘Forget your husband, take your son and open his eyes! Children under 110 centimeters do not need a
Reprint 2026-27
76/KALEIDOSCOPE ticket. If you don’t want to go, sell it at the door and you’ll earn enough to buy a couple of watermelons!’ Lao Chiang had always been a practical man.
Tao Ying decided to take the day off and go on an outing with Xiao Ye.
It is rare to find such a large patch of grass in the middle of the city. Even before they got there, there was something refreshing, something green in the air, as if they were approaching a valley, or a waterfall. Xiao Ye snatches the ticket from his mother’s hand, puts it between his lips, and flies towards the gilded gates of the temple. A little animal rushing to quench his thirst.
Tao Ying suddenly feels a little sad. Is the mere attraction of a temple enough for Xiao Ye to abandon his mother? But almost immediately she banishes the thought— hasn’t she brought her son here today to make him happy?
The guard at the gate is a young man dressed in a red top and black trousers. Tao Ying feels somehow that he ought to have been in yellow. This uniform makes him look somewhat like a waiter.
Xiao Ye knows exactly what he has to do. Moving amongst the crowd, he seems like a tiny drop of water in the current of a large river.
The young man takes the ticket from his mouth, plucking a leaf from a spring branch.
Tao Ying’s gaze softly envelopes her son, a strand of silk unwinding towards him, following his every gesture.
‘Ticket.’ The youth in red bars her way with one arm, his voice as pithy as if he was spitting out a date stone.
Tao Ying points at her son with infinite tenderness.
She feels that everybody should see how lovely he is.
‘I am asking for your ticket.’ The red youth does not
‘Didn’t the child just give it to you?’ Tao Ying’s voice is peaceful. This boy is too young, years away from being a father, she thinks. Tao Ying is not working today and is in a really good mood. She is happy to be patient.
‘That was his ticket, now I need to see yours.’ The youth remains unmoved.
Reprint 2026-27
77/ONE CENTIMETRE
Tao Ying has to pause for a moment before it sinks in—there are two of them and they need a ticket each.
‘I thought that children were exempt?’ She is confused.
‘Mama, hurry up!’ Xiao Ye shouts to her from inside the doors.
‘Mama is coming!’ Tao Ying shouts back. A crowd is beginning to gather, so many fishes swarming towards a bright light.
Tao Ying starts to panic. She wants this fracas to end, her child is waiting for her.
‘Who told you he doesn’t need a ticket?’ The guard tilts his head—the more onlookers the better.
‘It says so on the back of the ticket.’
‘Exactly what does it say?’ This boy is obviously not a professional.
‘It says that children under 110 centimetres do not have to pay.’ Tao Ying is full of confidence. She moves to pick up one of the tickets from a box next to the guard and reads out what is printed on the back for all to hear.
‘Stop right there!’ The youth has turned nasty. Tao
Ying realises she should not have touched the box and quickly withdraws her hand.
‘So you are familiar with the rules and regulations are you?’ Now the young man addresses her with the formal
‘you’. Tao Ying detects the sarcasm in his tone but she simply nods.
‘Well, your son is over 110 centimetres,’ he says with certainty.
‘No he isn’t.’ Tao Ying is still smiling.
Everybody begins to look at the mother with suspicion.
‘He just ran past the mark. I saw it clearly.’ The guard is equally firm, pointing at a red line on the wall which looks like an earthworm inching across the road after a rainstorm.
‘Mama, why are you taking so long? I thought I had lost you!’ Xiao Ye shouts to her affectionately. He runs towards his mother, as if she was one of his favourite toys.
The crowd titters. Good, they think, here is proof, the whole matter can be cleared up at once.
Reprint 2026-27
78/KALEIDOSCOPE
The youth is getting a little nervous. He is just doing his job. He is certain he is right. But this woman seems very confident, perhaps that would be awful...
Tao Ying remains calm. In fact, she feels a little smug.
Her son loves excitement. This is turning into something of an event so it is bound to delight him.
‘Come over here,’ the youth commands.
The crowd holds its breath.
Xiao Ye looks at his mother. Tao Ying gives him a little nod. He walks over to the guard graciously, coughs a little, adjusts his jacket. In front of the gaze of the crowd, Xiao
Ye is every inch the hero as he approaches the earthworm.
Then—the crowd looks, and sees—the worm comes to
Xiao Ye’s ear.
How is this possible?
Tao Ying is by his side in two paces. The flat of her hand lands heavily on the little boy’s head, making a sound as crisp as a ping-pong ball popping underfoot.
Xiao Ye stares at his mother. He is not crying. He is shocked by the pain. He has never been hit before.
The crowd draws its breath.
‘Punishing a child is one thing, hitting him on the head is totally unacceptable!’
‘What a way for a mother to behave! So what if you have to buy another ticket? This is a disgrace, hitting a child to cover up your own mistake!’
‘She can’t be his natural mother...’
Everybody has an opinion.
Tao Ying is feeling a little agitated now. She had not meant to hit Xiao Ye. She meant to smooth down his hair,
But she realises that even if Xiao Ye were bald at this instant, he would still be towering above the worm on the
‘Xiao Ye, don’t stand on tip-toe!’ Tao Ying’s voice is
‘Mama, I’m not...’ Xiao Ye begins to cry.
It’s true. He isn’t. The worm crawls somewhere next to his brow.
The guard stretches himself lazily. His vision is sharp,
Reprint 2026-27
79/ONE CENTIMETRE he has caught quite a few people who had tried to get through without paying. ‘Go get a ticket!’ he screams at
Tao Ying. All pretence of courtesy has by now been eaten up by the worm.
‘But my son is less than one meter ten!’ Tao Ying insists even though she realises she stands alone.
‘Everyone who tries to escape paying always says the same thing. Do you think these people are going to believe you, or are they going to believe me? This is a universally accepted measurement. The International Standard Ruler is in Paris, made of pure platinum. Did you know that?’
Tao is flummoxed. All she knows is that to make a dress she needs two metres eighty centimetres, she does not know where the International Ruler is kept. She is only astonished at the power of the Buddha which can make her son grow several centimetres within minutes!
‘But we were on the bus just now and he wasn’t as tall...’
‘No doubt when he was born he wasn’t as tall either!’ the youth sneers, chilling the air.
Reprint 2026-27
80/KALEIDOSCOPE
Standing in the middle of the jeering crowd, Tao Ying’s face has turned as white as her ticket.
‘Mama, what is happening?’ Xiao Ye comes away from the earthworm to hold his mother’s frozen hand with his own little warm one.
‘It’s nothing. Mama has forgotten to buy a ticket for you.’ Tao Ying can barely speak.
‘Forgotten? That’s a nice way of putting it! Why don’t you forget you have a son as well?’ The youth will not forgive her calm confidence of a moment ago.
‘What more do you want?’ Tao Ying’s temper rises. In front of her child, she must preserve her dignity.
‘You have a nerve! This is not to do with what I want, clearly you must apologise! God knows how you had managed to get hold of a complimentary ticket in the first place. To get in free is not enough, now you want to sneak in an extra person. Have you no shame? Don’t think you can get away with this, go, get yourself a valid ticket!’ The youth is now leaning on the wall, facing the crowd as if he is pronouncing an edict from on high.
Tao Ying’s hands are trembling like the strings on a pei-pa. What should she do? Should she argue with him?
She is not afraid of a good fight but she doesn’t want her child to be witness to such a scene. For the sake of Xiao
Ye, she will swallow her pride.
‘Mama is going to buy a ticket. You wait here, don’t run off.’ Tao Ying tries to smile. This outing is such a rare occasion, whatever happens she mustn’t spoil the mood.
She is determined to make everything all right.
‘Mama, did you really not buy a ticket?’ Xiao Ye looks at her, full of surprise and bewilderment.
