204/KALEIDOSCOPE
Chandalika Chandalika Chandalika Chandalika Chandalika
Rabindranath Tagore was a poet, novelist, short- story writer and dramatist. He was awarded the
Nobel Prize for Literature in 1913. Tagore’s interest in drama was fostered while he was a boy, for his family enjoyed writing and staging plays. The music in his plays is instrumental in bringing out the delicate display of emotion around an idea.
The central interest in his plays is the unfolding of character; of the opening up of the soul to enlightenment of some sort.
INTRODUCTION
This short drama is based on the following Buddhist legend.
Ananda, the famous disciple of the Buddha, was one day returning from a visit when he felt thirsty and, approaching a well on the way, asked for water from a chandalika, a girl belonging to the lowest untouchable caste. The girl gave him water and fell in love with the beautiful monk.
Unable to restrain herself, she made her mother, who knew the art of magic, work her spell on him. The spell proved stronger than Ananda’s will and the spell-bound monk presented himself at their house at night; but, as he saw the girl spread the couch for him, he was overcome with shame and remorse and prayed inwardly to his master to save him. The Buddha heard the prayer and broke the magic spell and Ananda went away, as pure as he came.
This crude plot of the popular tale, showing how the psychic power of the Buddha saves his devotee from the lust of a chandal girl, has been transformed by the poet
Rabindranath Tagore
1861-1941
1 1 1 1 1
Reprint 2026-27
205/CHANDALIKA into a psychological drama of intense spiritual conflict. It is not the story of a wicked girl roused to lust by the physical beauty of the monk, but of a very sensitive girl, condemned by her birth to a despised caste, who is suddenly awakened to a consciousness of her full rights as a woman by the humanity of a follower of the Buddha, who accepts water from her hand and teaches her to judge herself not by the artificial values that society attaches to the accidents of birth, but by her capacity for love and service.
This is a great revelation for her, which she calls a new birth; for she is washed clean of her self-degradation and rises up a full human being with her right to love and to give. And since her own self is the most she can give, and since none is more worthy of the gift of her surrender than the bhikshu who has redeemed, or, as she puts it, created her, she yearns to offer herself to him. But Ananda, detached from all earthly cares and immersed in his inner self, knows nothing of all this and passes by without recognising her.
She is humiliated, wounded in her newly awakened sensibility, and determines to drag the monk from his pride of renunciation to the abjectness of desire for her. She has lost all religious scruple or fear, for she owed nothing to religion save her humiliation.
‘A religion that insults is a false religion. Everyone united to make me conform to a creed that blinds and gags. But since that day something forbids me to conform any longer. I’m afraid of nothing now.’
She forces her mother to exercise her art of magic on
Ananda. She refers to it as the primeval spell, the spell of the earth, which is far more potent than the immature sadhana of the monks. The ‘spell of the earth’ proves its force and Ananda is dragged to their door, his face distorted with agony and shame. Seeing her redeemer, so noble and resplendent before, thus cruelly transformed and degraded, she is horrified at the selfish and destructive nature of her desire. The hero to whom she yearned to dedicate herself was not this creature, blinded by lust and darkened with shame, but Ananda of the radiant form, who had
Reprint 2026-27
206/KALEIDOSCOPE given her the gift of a new birth and had revealed her own true humanity. In remorse she curses herself and falls at his feet, begging for forgiveness. The mother revokes the spell and willingly pays the price of such revocation, which is death. The chandalika is thus redeemed for the second time, purged of the pride and egoism that had made her forget that love does not claim possession, but gives freedom.
Chandalika is a tragedy of self-consciousness over- reaching its limit. Self-consciousness, up to a point, is necessary to self-development; for, without an awareness of the dignity of one’s own role or function, one cannot give one’s best to the world. Without rights there can be no obligations, and service and virtue when forced become marks of slavery. But self-consciousness, like good wine, easily intoxicates, and it is difficult to control the dose and have just enough of it. Vanity and pride get the upper hand and he who clings to his rights very often trespasses on those of others. This is what happened to the heroine. Prakriti, in her eagerness to give, forgot that Ananda need not take; her devotion grew so passionate that she could not make her surrender without first possessing. Yet it was inevitable that it should be so; for a new consciousness, after ages of suppression, is overpowering and one learns restraint only after suffering. Hence the tragedy. The good mother who, so unwillingly, worked the spell to please her importunate daughter, and who so willingly revoked it to save Ananda, dies in the process. The daughter, though chastened and made wise by suffering, has paid a heavy price; for wisdom is not happiness and renunciation is not fulfilment.
Read and find out Read and find out Read and find out Read and find out Read and find out
How does Prakriti’s mother react when she hears of
Prakriti’s encounter with the monk?
MOTHER. Prakriti! Prakriti! Where has she gone? What ails the girl, I wonder? She’s never to be found in the
Reprint 2026-27
207/CHANDALIKA
PRAKRITI. Here, mother, here I am.
MOTHER. Where?
PRAKRITI. Here, by the well.
MOTHER. Whatever will you do next? Past noon, and a blistering sun, and the earth too hot for the feet! The morning’s water was drawn long ago, and the other girls in the village have all taken their pots home.
Why, the very crows on the amloki branches are gasping for heat. Yet you sit and roast in the Vaisakh sun for no reason at all! There’s a story in the Purana about how Uma left home and did penance in the burning sun—is that what you are about?
PRAKRITI. Yes, mother, that’s it—I’m doing penance.
MOTHER. Good heavens! And for whom?
PRAKRITI. For someone whose call has come to me.
MOTHER. What call is that?
PRAKRITI. ‘Give me water.’ He set the words echoing in my
MOTHER. Heaven defend us! He said to you ‘Give me water’? Who was it? Someone of our own caste?
PRAKRITI. That’s what he said—that he belonged to our
MOTHER. You didn’t hide your caste? Did you tell him that you are a chandalini?
PRAKRITI. I told him, yes. He said it wasn’t true. If the black clouds of Sravana are dubbed chandal, he said, what of it? It doesn’t change their nature, or destroy the virtue of their water. Don’t humiliate yourself, he said; self-humiliation is a sin, worse than self-murder.
MOTHER. What words are these from you? Have you remembered some tale of a former birth?
PRAKRITI. No, this is a tale of my new birth.
MOTHER. You make me laugh. New birth, indeed! Since when, pray?
PRAKRITI. It was the other day. The palace gong had just struck noon and it was blazing hot. I was washing that calf at the well—the one whose mother died. Then
In the original, this play, unlike the others, is not divided into acts. There is no lapse of time in the action. The divisions here suggested indicate the intervals which would be found desirable in stage production.
Reprint 2026-27
208/KALEIDOSCOPE a Buddhist monk came and stood before me, in his yellow robes, and said, ‘Give me water’. My heart leaped with wonder. I started up trembling and bowed before his feet, without touching them. His form was radiant as with the light of dawn. I said, ‘I am a chandalini, and the well-water is unclean’. He said,
‘As I am a human being, so also are you, and all water is clean and holy that cools our heat and satisfies our thirst’. For the first time in my life I heard such words, for the first time I poured water into his cupped hands—the hands of a man the very dust of whose feet I would never have dared to touch.
MOTHER. O, you stupid girl, how could you be so reckless?
There will be a price to pay for this madness! Don’t you know what caste you were born in?
PRAKRITI. Only once did he cup his hands, to take the water from mine. Such a little water, yet that water grew to a fathomless, boundless sea. In it flowed all the seven seas in one, and my caste was drowned, and my birth washed clean.
MOTHER. Why, even the way you speak is changed. He has laid your tongue under a spell. Do you understand yourself what you are saying?
PRAKRITI. Was there no other water, mother, in all Sravasti city? Why did he come to this well of all wells? I may truly call it my new birth! He came to give me the honour of quenching Man’s thirst. That was the mighty act of merit which he sought. Nowhere else could he have found the water which could fulfill his holy vow— no, not in any sacred stream. He said that Janaki bathed in such water as this, at the beginning of her forest exile, and that Guhak, the chandal, drew it for her. My heart has been dancing ever since, and night and day I hear those solemn tones— ‘Give me water, give me water’.
MOTHER. I don’t know what to make of it, child; I don’t like it. I don’t understand the magic of their spells.
Today I don’t recognise your speech; tomorrow, perhaps, I shall not even recognise your face. Their spells can make a changeling of the very soul itself.
Reprint 2026-27
209/CHANDALIKA
PRAKRITI. All these days you have never really known me, mother. He who has recognised me will reveal me.
And so I wait and watch. The midday gong booms from the palace, the girls take up their water-pots and go home, the kite soars alone into the far sky, and I bring my pitcher and sit here at the well by the wayside.
MOTHER. For whom do you wait?
PRAKRITI. For the wayfarer.
MOTHER. What wayfarer will come to you, you crazy girl?
PRAKRITI. That one wayfarer, mother, the one and only. In him are all who fare along the ways of all the world.
Day after day goes by, yet he does not come. Though he spoke no word, his word was given—why does he not keep his word? For my heart is become like a waterless waste, where the heat-haze quivers all day long. Its water cannot be given, for no one comes to seek it.
MOTHER. I can make nothing of your talk today; it’s as though you were intoxicated. Tell me plainly, what do you want?
PRAKRITI. I want him. All unlooked for—he came, and taught me this marvellous truth, that even my service will count with the God who guides the world. O words of great wonder! That I may serve, I, a flower sprung from a poison-plant! Let him raise that truth, that flower from the dust, and take it to his bosom.
MOTHER. Be warned, Prakriti, these men’s words are meant only to be heard, not to be practised. The filth into which an evil fate has cast you is a wall of mud that no spade in the world can break through. You are unclean; beware of tainting the outside world with your unclean presence. See that you keep to your own place, narrow as it is. To stray anywhere beyond its limits is to trespass.
Reprint 2026-27
210/KALEIDOSCOPE
PRAKRITI [sings].
Blessed am I, says the flower, who belong to the
For I serve you, my God, in this my lowly home.
Make me forget that I am born of dust,
For my spirit is free from it.
When you bend your eyes upon me my petals tremble in joy;
Give me a touch of your feet and make me heavenly,
For the earth must offer its worship through me.
MOTHER. Child, I’m beginning to understand something of what you say. You are a woman; by serving you must worship, and by serving you must rule. Women alone can in a moment overstep the bounds of caste;
when once the curtains of destiny are drawn aside, they all stand revealed in their queenliness. You had a good chance, you know, when the king’s son was deer-hunting and came to this very well of yours. You remember, don’t you?
PRAKRITI. Yes, I remember.
MOTHER. Why didn’t you go to the king’s house? He had forgotten everything in your beauty.
PRAKRITI. Yes, he had forgotten everything—forgotten that
I was a human being. He had gone out hunting beasts;
he saw nothing but the beast whom he wanted to bind in chains of gold.
MOTHER. At least he noticed your beauty, if only as game to be hunted. As for the Bhikshu, does he see the woman in you?
PRAKRITI. You won’t understand, mother, you won’t! I feel that in all these days he is the first who ever really recognised me. That is a marvellous thing. I want him, mother, I want him beyond all measure. I want to take this life of mine and lay it like a basket of flowers at his feet. It will not defile them. Let everyone marvel at my daring! I shall glory in my claim. ‘I am your handmaid,’ I shall declare—for otherwise I must lie bound for ever at the whole world’s feet, a slave!
Reprint 2026-27
211/CHANDALIKA
MOTHER. Why do you get so excited, child? You were born a slave. It’s the writ of Destiny, who can undo it?
PRAKRITI. Fie, fie, Mother, I tell you again, don’t delude yourself with this self-humiliation—it is false, and a sin. Plenty of slaves are born of royal blood, but I am no slave; plenty of chandals are born of Brahmin families, but I am no chandal.
MOTHER. I don’t know how to answer you, child. Very good. I’ll go to him myself, and cling to his feet. ‘You accept food from every home’, I’ll say. ‘Come to our house too, and accept from our hands at least a bowl of water.’
PRAKRITI. No, no, I’ll not call him in that way, from outside.
I’ll send my call into his soul, for him to hear. I am longing to give myself; it is like a pain at my heart.
Who is going to accept the gift? Who will join with me in give-and-take? Will he not mingle his longings with mine, as the Ganges mingles with the black waters of the Jumna? For music springs up of itself, and he who came unbidden has left behind him a word of hope. What is the use of one pitcher of water when the earth is cracked with drought? Will not the clouds come of themselves to fill the whole sky, the rain seek the soil by its own weight?
MOTHER. What is the use of such talk? If the clouds come, they come: if they don’t, they don’t; if the crops wither, it’s no concern of theirs! What more can we do than sit and watch the sky?
PRAKRITI. That won’t do for me; I won’t simply sit and watch. You know how to work spells; let those spells be the clasp of my arms, let them drag him here.
MOTHER. What are you saying, wretched girl? Is there no limit to your recklessness? It would be playing with fire! Are these bhikshus like ordinary folk? How am I to work spells on them? I shudder even to think of it.
PRAKRITI. You would have worked them boldly enough on the king’s son.
MOTHER. I’m not afraid of the king; he might have had me impaled, perhaps. But these men—they do nothing.
Reprint 2026-27
212/KALEIDOSCOPE
PRAKRITI. I fear nothing any longer, except to sink back again, to forget myself again, to enter again the house of darkness. That would be worse than death! Bring him here you must! I speak so boldly, of such great matters—isn’t that in itself a wonder? Who worked the wonder but he? Shall there not be further wonders?
Shall he not come to my side, and sit with me on the corner of my cloth?
MOTHER. Suppose I can bring him, are you ready to pay the price? Nothing will be left to you.
PRAKRITI. No, nothing will be left. The burden and heritage of birth after birth—nothing will remain. Only let me bring it all to an end, then I shall live indeed. That’s why I need him. Nothing will be left me. I have waited for age after age, and now in this birth my life shall be fulfilled. My mind is saying it over and over again— fulfilled! It was for this that I heard those wonderful words, ‘Give me water’. Today I know that even I can give. Everyone else had hidden the truth from me. I sit and watch for his coming today to give, to give, to give everything I have.
MOTHER. Have you no respect for religion?
PRAKRITI. How can I say? I respect him who respects me.
A religion that insults is a false religion. Everyone united to make me conform to a creed that blinds and gags. But since that day something forbids me to conform any longer. I’m afraid of nothing now. Chant your spells, bring the Bhikshu to the side of the chandalini. I myself shall do him honour—no one else can honour him so well.
MOTHER. Aren’t you afraid of bringing a curse upon yourself?
PRAKRITI. There has been a curse upon me all my life.
Poison kills poison, they say—so one curse another.
Not another word, mother, not another word. Begin your spells, I cannot bear any more delay.
MOTHER. Very well, then. What is his name?
PRAKRITI. His name is Ananda.
MOTHER. Ananda? The disciple of the Lord Buddha?
PRAKRITI. Yes, it is he.
Reprint 2026-27
213/CHANDALIKA
MOTHER. O my heart’s treasure, you are the apple of my eye—but it’s a great wrong I’m putting my hand to at your bidding!
PRAKRITI. What wrong? I will bring to my side the one who brings all near. What crime is there in that?
MOTHER. They draw men by the strength of their virtue.
We drag them with spells, as beasts are dragged in a noose. We only churn up the mud.
PRAKRITI. So much the better. Without the churning, how can the well be cleansed?
MOTHER (apostrophising Ananda].
O thou exalted one, thy power to forgive is greater far than my power to offend. I am about to do thee dishonour, yet I bow before thee: accept my obeisance,
PRAKRITI. What are you afraid of, mother? Yours are the lips I use, but it’s I who chant the spells. If my longing can draw him here, and if that is a crime, then I will commit the crime. I care nothing for a code which holds only punishment, and no comfort.
MOTHER. You are immensely daring, Prakriti.
PRAKRITI. You call me daring? Think of the might of h
