Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii 68
Sorting a large number of items can take a substantial amount of time. However, this extra time (called overhead) is worth when compared to the amount of time needed to find an element from an unsorted list. Sorting is an important area of study in computer science, and many sorting algorithms have been developed and analysed from their performance point of view. In this chapter, we will learn about three sorting methods and implement them using Python. Bubble sort is discussed in section 5.2, followed by discussion on selection sort and insertion sort in section 5.3 and 5.4, respectively
5.2 BuBBle Sort
The first sorting technique we are going to understand is
Bubble sort. It sorts a given list of elements by repeatedly comparing the adjacent elements and swapping them if they are unordered. Swapping two elements means changing their positions with each other. In algorithm, every iteration through each element of a list is called a pass. For a list with n elements, the bubble sort makes a total of n – 1 passes to sort the list. In each pass, the required pairs of adjacent elements of the list will be compared. In order to arrange elements in ascending order, the largest element is identified after each pass and placed at the correct position in the list. This can be considered as the largest element being ‘bubbled up’.
Hence the name Bubble sort. This sorted element is not considered in the remaining passes and thus the list of elements gets reduced in successive passes.
Figure 5.1 demonstrates the working of the bubble sort method to arrange a list in ascending order. Let us consider a list having 6 elements as numList = [8,
7, 13, 1, -9, 4]. In the figure, elements being compared are highlighted with blue colour and sorted elements are highlighted with green colour. To begin sorting, the element at index 0 is compared with the element at index 1. If the first element is bigger, it is swapped with the second. Else, no change is done. Next, the element at index 1 is compared with the element at index 2. This continues till the end of the list is reached. After the first pass, the largest element will reach the end of the list as shown in Figure 5.1 with green colour.
Can you identify other examples where sorting plays an important role in computers?
In Figure 5.1, we can see that the list got sorted in the 4th pass itself. Still the bubble sort technique made a redundant 5th pass which did not result in any swap. If there is no swapping in any pass, it means the list is already sorted, hence the sorting operation needs to be stopped. Can you think of making any improvement in the
Algorithm 5.1 so that it stops when the list becomes sorted?
Reprint 2026-27
