Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii 78
Calculating the complexity of different algorithms involves mathematical calculations and detailed analysis, and it is beyond the scope of this textbook to discuss them in detail. However, we will discuss some basics of complexity to get some ideas. The following tips will guide us in estimating the time complexity of an algorithm.
• Any algorithm that does not have any loop will have time complexity as 1 since the number of instructions to be executed will be constant, irrespective of the data size. Such algorithms are known as Constant time algorithms.
• Any algorithm that has a loop (usually 1 to n) will have the time complexity as n because the loop will execute the statement inside its body n number of times. Such algorithms are known as Linear time algorithms.
• A loop within a loop (nested loop) will have the time complexity as n2. Such algorithms are known as
Quadratic time algorithms.
• If there is a nested loop and also a single loop, the time complexity will be estimated on the basis of the nested loop only.
Now, look at the Python programs of the three sorting techniques discussed in this chapter, you will notice that in each of the three programs, there is a nested loop, i.e., one inside another. So according to the above rules, all the sorting algorithms namely, bubble sort, selection sort and insertion sort have a time complexity of n2.
• The process of placing or rearranging a collection of elements into a particular order is known as sorting.
• Bubble sort is the simplest sorting algorithm that works by repeatedly swapping the adjacent elements in case they are unordered in n-1 passes.
• In Selection Sort, the smallest element is selected from the unsorted array and swapped with the
Reprint 2026-27
S orting 79
1. Consider a list of 10 elements:
numList =[7,11,3,10,17,23,1,4,21,5].
Display the partially sorted list after three complete passes of Bubble sort.
2. Identify the number of swaps required for sorting the following list using selection sort and bubble sort and identify which is the better sorting technique with respect to the number of comparisons.
List 1 : 63 42 21 9
3. Consider the following lists:
List 1: 2 3 5 7 11
List 2: 11 7 5 3 2
If the lists are sorted using Insertion sort then which of the lists List1 or List 2 will make the minimum number of comparisons? Justify using diagrammatic representation.
4. Write a program using user defined functions that accepts a List of numbers as an argument and finds its median. (Hint : Use bubble sort to sort the accepted list.
If there are odd number of terms, the median is the center term. If there are even number of terms, add the two middle terms and divide by 2 get median)
leftmost element, and that element becomes a part of the sorted array. The process continues for the next element in the unsorted array till the list is sorted.
• Insertion Sort places the element of a list at its suitable place in each pass. It is similar to the placing of cards at its right position while playing cards.
• Complexity analysis is performed to explain how an algorithm will perform when the input grows larger.
exercISe
Reprint 2026-27
Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii 80
5. All the branches of XYZ school conducted an aptitude test for all the students in the age group 14 - 16. There were a total of n students. The marks of n students are stored in a list. Write a program using a user defined function that accepts a list of marks as an argument and calculates the ‘xth’ percentile (where x is any number between 0 and 100).You are required to perform the following steps to be able to calculate the ‘xth’ percentile.
Note: Percentile is a measure of relative performance i.e. It is calculated based on a candidate’s performance with respect to others. For example : If a candidate's score is in the 90th percentile, that means she/he scored better than 90% of people who took the test.
Steps to calculate the xth percentile:
I. Order all the values in the data set from smallest to largest using Selection Sort. In general any of the sorting methods can be used.
II. Calculate index by multiplying x percent by the total number of values, n.
For example: to find 90th percentile for 120 students:
0.90*120 = 108
III. Ensure that the index is a whole number by using math.round()
IV. Display the value at the index obtained in Step 3.
The corresponding value in the list is the xth percentile.
6. During admission in a course, the names of the students are inserted in ascending order. Thus, performing the sorting operation at the time of inserting elements in a list. Identify the type of sorting technique being used and write a program using a user defined function that is invoked every time a name is input and stores the name in ascending order of names in the list.
Reprint 2026-27
