Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii 96
7. Estimate the number of key comparisons required in binary search and linear search if we need to find the details of a person in a sorted database having 230 (1,073,741,824) records when details of the person being searched lies at the middle position in the database.
What do you interpret from your findings?
8. Use the hash function: h(element)= element%11 to store the collection of numbers: [44, 121, 55,
33, 110, 77, 22, 66] in a hash table. Display the hash table created. Search if the values 11, 44, 88 and 121 are present in the hash table, and display the search results.
9. Write a Python program by considering a mapping of list of countries and their capital cities such as:
CountryCapital= {'India':'New Delhi','UK':
'London','France':'Paris',
'Switzerland': 'Berne',
'Australia': 'Canberra'}
Let us presume that our hash function is the length of the Country Name. Take two lists of appropriate size:
one for keys (Country) and one for values (Capital). To put an element in the hash table, compute its hash code by counting the number of characters in Country, then put the key and value in both the lists at the corresponding indices. For example, India has a hash code of 5. So, we store India at the 5th position (index 4) in the keys list, and New Delhi at the 5th position (index 4) in the values list and so on. So that we end up with:
hash index = length of key - 1 List of Keys List of Values
0 None None
1 UK London
2 None None
3 Cuba Havana
4 India New Delhi
5 France Paris
6 None None
7 None None
8 Australia Canberra
9 None None
10 Switzerland Berne
Now search the capital of India, France and the USA in the hash table and display your result.
Reprint 2026-27
7.1 IntroductIon to data
Many a time, people take decisions based on certain data or information. For example, while choosing a college for getting admission, one looks at placement data of previous years of that college, educational qualification and experience of the faculty members, laboratory and hostel facilities, fees, etc. So we can say that identification of a college is based on various data and their analysis.
Governments systematically collect and record data about the population through a process called census. Census data contains valuable information which are helpful is planning and formulating policies. Likewise, the coaching staff of a sports team analyses previous performances of opponent teams for making strategies. Banks maintain data about the customers, their account details and transactions. All these examples highlight the need of data in various fields. Data are indeed crucial for decision making.
In this Chapter
» Introduction to Data
» Data Collection
» Data Storage
» Data Processing
» Statistical Techniques for
Data Processing
“Data is not information, Information is not knowledge, Knowledge is not understanding, Understanding is not wisdom.”
— Gary Schubert
7 Understanding Data
Reprint 2026-27
Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii 98
In the previous examples, one cannot make decisions by looking at the data itself. In our example of choosing a college, suppose the placement cell of the college has maintained data of about 2000 students placed with different companies at different salary packages in the last 3 years. Looking at such data, one cannot make any remark about the placement of students of that college. The college processes and analyses this data and the results are given in the placement brochure of the college through summarisation as well as visuals for easy understanding. Hence, data need to be gathered, processed and analysed for making decisions.
In general, data is a collection of characters, numbers, and other symbols that represents values of some situations or variables. Data is plural and singular of the word data is “datum”. Using computers, data are stored in electronic forms because data processing becomes faster and easier as compared to manual data processing done by people. The Information and Communication
Technology (ICT) revolution led by computer, mobile and
Internet has resulted in generation of large volume of data and at a very fast pace. The following list contains some examples of data that we often come across.
• Name, age, gender, contact details, etc., of a person
• Transactions data generated through banking, ticketing, shopping, etc. whether online or offline
• Images, graphics, animations, audio, video
• Documents and web pages
• Online posts, comments and messages
• Signals generated by sensors
• Satellite data including meteorological data, communication data, earth observation data, etc.
7.1.1 Importance of Data
Human beings rely on data for making decisions.
Besides, large amount of data when processed with the help of a computer, show us the possibilities or hidden traits which are otherwise not visible to humans. When one withdraws money from ATM, the bank needs to debit the withdrawn amount from the linked account. So the bank needs to maintain data and update it as and when required. The meteorological offices continuously keep on monitoring satellite data for any upcoming cyclone or heavy rain.
A knowledge base is a store of information consisting of facts, assumptions and rules which an AI system can use for decision making.
Reprint 2026-27
