underStanding data 99
In a competitive business environment, it is important for business organisations to continuously monitor and analyse market behaviour with respect to their products and take actions accordingly. Besides, companies identify customer demands as well as feedbacks, and make changes in their products or services accordingly.
The dynamic pricing concept used by airlines and railway is another example where they decide the price based on relationships between demand and supply.
The cab booking Apps increase or decrease the price based on demand for cabs at a particular time. Certain restaurants offer discounted price (called happy hours), they decide when and how much discount to offer by analysing sales data at different time periods.
Besides business, following are some other scenarios where data are also stored and analysed for making decisions:
• The electronic voting machines are used for recording the votes cast. Subsequently, the voting data from all the machines are accumulated to declare election results in a short time as compared to manual counting of ballot papers.
• Scientists record data while doing experiments to calculate and compare results.
• Pharmaceutical companies record data while trying out a new medicine to see its effectiveness.
• Libraries maintain data about books in the library and the membership of the library.
• The search engines give us results after analysing large volume of data available on the websites across
World Wide Web (www).
• Weather alerts are generated by analysing data received from various satellites.
7.1.2 Types of Data
As data come from different sources, they can be in different formats. For example, an image is a collection of pixels; a video is made up of frames; a fee slip is made up of few numeric and non-numeric entries; and messages/chats are made up of texts, icons (emoticons)
and images/videos. Two broad categories in which data can be classified on the basis of their format are:
(A) Structured Data
Data which is organised and can be recorded in a well defined format is called structured data. Structured
Reprint 2026-27
Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii 100 data is usually stored in computer in a tabular (in rows and columns) format where each column represents different data for a particular parameter called attribute/ characteristic/variable and each row represents data of an observation for different attributes. Table 7.1 shows structured data related to an inventory of kitchen items maintained by a shop.
Given this data, using a spreadsheet or other such software, the shop owner can find out how many total items are there by summing the column Items_in_
Inventory of Table 7.1 The owner of the shop can also calculate the total value of all items in the inventory by multiplying each entry of column 3 (Unit Price) with corresponding entry of column 5 (Items_in_Inventory)
and finding their sum.
Table 7.2 shows more examples of structured data recorded for different attributes.
Table 7.2 Attributes maintained for different activities
Entity/Activities Data Fields/Parameters/Attributes
Books at a shop BookTitle, Author, Price, YearofPublication
Depositing fees in a school StudentName, Class, RollNo, FeesAmount, DepositDate
Amount withdrawal from ATM AccHolderName, AccountNo, TypeofAcc, DateofWithdrawal,
AmountWithdrawn, ATMid, TimeOfWithdrawal
Table 7.1 Structured data about kitchen items in a shop
ModelNo ProductName Unit Price Discount(%) Items_in_Inventory
ABC1 Water bottle 126 8 13
ABC2 Melamine Plates 320 5 45
ABC3 Dinner Set 4200 10 8
GH67 Jug 80 0 10
GH78 Table Spoon 120 5 14
GH81 Bucket 190 12 6
NK2 Kitchen Towel 25 0 32
Activity 7.1
Observe Voter Identity cards of your family members and identify the data fields under which data are organised. Are they same for (B) Unstructured Data
A newspaper contains various types of news items which are also called data. But there is no fixed pattern that a newspaper follows in placing news articles. One day there might be three images of different sizes on a page along with five news items and one or more advertisements. While on another day there, might be one big image with three textual news items. So there is
Reprint 2026-27 underStanding data 101 no particular format nor any fixed structure for printing news. Another example is the content of an email.
There is no fixed structure about how many lines or paragraphs one has to write in an email or how many files are to be attached with an email. In summary, data which are not in the traditional row and column structure is called unstructured data.
Examples of unstructured data include web pages consisting of text as well as multimedia contents (image, graphics, audio/video). Other examples include text documents, business reports, books, audio/video files, social media messages. Although there are ways to process unstructured data, we are going to focus on handling structured data only in this book.
Unstructured data are sometimes described with the help of some other data called metadata. Metadata is basically data about data. For example, we describe different parts of an email as subject, recipient, main body, attachment, etc. These are the metadata for the email data. Likewise, we can have some metadata for an image file as image size (in KB or MB), image type (for example, JPEG, PNG), image resolution, etc.
7.2 data collectIon
For processing data, we need to collect or gather data first. We can then store the data in a file or database for later use. Data collection here means identifying already available data or collecting from the appropriate sources. Suppose there are three different scenarios where sales data in a grocery store are available:
• Sales data are available with the shopkeeper in a diary or register. In this case we should enter the data in a digital format for example, in a spreadsheet.
• Data are already available in a digital format, say in a CSV (comma separated values) file.
• The shopkeeper has so far not recorded any data in either form but wants to get a software developed for maintaining sales data and accounts. The software may be developed using a programming language such as Python which can be used to store and retrieve data from a CSV file or a database management system like MySQL, which will be discussed further.
When we click a photograph using our digital or mobile camera, does it have some metadata associated with it?
Reprint 2026-27
Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii 102
Data are continuously being generated at different sources. Our interactions with digital medium are continuously generating huge volumes of data. Hospitals are collecting data about patients for improving their services. Shopping malls are collecting data about the items being purchased by people. On analysing such data, suppose it appears that bedsheets and groceries are frequently bought together. Hence, the shop owner may decide to display bedsheets near the grocery section in the mall to increase the sales. Likewise, a political analyst may look at the data contained in the posts and messages at a social media platform and analyse to see public opinion before an election. Organisations like
World Bank and International Monetary Fund (IMF) are collecting data related to various economic parameters from different countries for making economic forecasts.
7.3 data storage
Once we gather data and process them to get results, we may not then simply discard the data. Rather, we would like to store them for future use as well. Data storage is the process of storing data on storage devices so that data can be retrieved later. Now a days large volume of data are being generated at a very high rate. As a result, data storage has become a challenging task. However, the decrease in the cost of digital storage devices has helped in simplifying this task. There are numerous digital storage devices available in the market like, Hard
Disk Drive (HDD), Solid State Drive (SSD), CD/DVD,
Tape Drive, Pen Drive, Memory Card, etc.
We store data like images, documents, audios/ videos, etc. as files in our computers. Likewise, school/ hospital data are stored in data files. We use computers to add, modify or delete data in these files or process these data files to get results. However, file processing has certain limitations, which can be overcome through
Database Management System (DBMS).
7.4 data ProcessIng
We are interested in understanding data as they hold valuable facts and information that can be useful in our decision making process. However, by looking at the vast or large amount of data, one cannot arrive at a conclusion. Rather, data need to be processed to
Identify attributes needed for creating an Aadhaar Card.
Is it necessary to store data in files before processing?
Reprint 2026-27
