underStanding data 103 get results and after analysing those results, we make conclusions or decisions.
We find automated data processing in situations like online bill payment, registration of complaints, booking tickets, etc. Figure 7.1 illustrates basic steps used to process the data to get the output.
Figure 7.2 shows some tasks along with data, processing and generated output/information.
7.5 statIstIcal technIques for data ProcessIng
Given a set of data values, we need to process them to get information. There are various techniques which help us to have preliminary understanding about the data.
Figure 7.2: Data based problem statements
Figure 7.1: Steps in data processing
Data Processing RAW DATA (Numbers/
Text/Image)
INFORMATION (In the form of table/ chart/text)
Input Processing Output
Data Collection
Data Prepration
Data Entry
Retrieve
Classify
Processing System
Data Process Cycle
Processing of filled in details for correctness of data received, eligibility as per advertisement or not, fees paid or not, photo and signature uploaded or not. Then, generate a roll number and add this applicant in the list of eligible applicants.
Student details like name, address, qualification, marks, mobile number, photo and sign, center choice, online fee payment details like credit/debit card, net banking or other mode of payment, etc.
Examination Admit card specifying roll number, center address, date and time of test.
A website handling online filling of student details for a competitive examination and generating admit card
Checking for valid PIN number, existing bank balance, if satisfied, then deduction of amount from that account and counting of rupees and initiate printing of receipt
ATM PIN number, account type, account number, card number,
ATM location from where money was withdrawn, date and time, and amount to be withdrawn.
Currency notes, printed slip with transaction details
A Bank handling withdrawals of cash through ATMs of its own branch
Verify login details and check availability of berth in that class. If payment done, issue tickets and deduct that number from the total available tickets on that coach.
Allocate PNR number and berths or generate a waiting number for that
Journey start and end stations, date of journey, number of tickets required, class of travel (Sleeper/AC/other), berth preference (if any), passenger name(s) and age(s), mobile and email id, payment related details,
Generate ticket with berth and coach number, or issue ticket with a waiting list number
Issue of train ticket
Problem Statement Processing Output
Inputs against which data are collected
A website handling online filling of student details for a competitive examination and generating admit card
A Bank handling withdrawals of cash through ATMs of its own branch
Issue of train ticket
Reprint 2026-27
