DatabaSe ConCeptS 119 (B) Data Constraint
Sometimes we put certain restrictions or limitations on the type of data that can be inserted in one or more columns of a table. This is done by specifying one or more constraints on that column(s) while creating the tables. For example, one can define the constraint that the column mobile number can only have non-negative integer values of exactly 10 digits. Since each student shall have one unique roll number, we can put the NOT
NULL and UNIQUE constraints on the RollNumber column. Constraints are used to ensure accuracy and reliability of data in the database.
(C) Meta-data or Data Dictionary
The database schema along with various constraints on the data is stored by DBMS in a database catalog or dictionary, called meta-data. A meta-data is data about the data.
(D) Database Instance
When we define database structure or schema, state of database is empty i.e. no data entry is there. After loading data, the state or snapshot of the database at any given time is the database instance. We may then retrieve data through queries or manipulate data
Teacher Office Staff
Guardian
Attendance
Database
DBMS Software processes Query
DBMS Software access database and its definition
Query Result
Figure 8.2: STUDENTATTENDANCE database environment
Reprint 2026-27
Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii 120 through updation, modification or deletion. Thus, the state of database can change, and thus a database schema can have many instances at different times.
(E) Query
A query is a request to a database for obtaining information in a desired way. Query can be made to get data from one table or from a combination of tables. For example, “find names of all those students present on
Attendance Date 2000-01-02” is a query to the database.
To retrieve or manipulate data, the user needs to write query using a query language called, which is discussed in chapter 8.
(F) Data Manipulation
Modification of database consists of three operations viz. Insertion, Deletion or Update. Suppose, Rivaan joins as a new student in the class then the student details need to be added in STUDENT as well as in GUARDIAN files of the Student Attendance database. This is called
Insertion operation on the database. In case a student leaves the school, then his/her data as well as her guardian details need to be removed from STUDENT,
GUARDIAN and ATTENDANCE files, respectively. This is called Deletion operation on the database. Suppose
Atharv’s Guardian has changed his mobile number, his
GPhone should be updated in GUARDIAN file. This is called Update operation on the database.
(G) Database Engine
Database engine is the underlying component or set of programs used by a DBMS to create database and handle various queries for data retrieval and manipulation.
8.4 relatIonal data model
Different types of DBMS are available and their classification is done based on the underlying data model.
A data model describes the structure of the database, including how data are defined and represented, relationships among data, and the constraints. The most commonly used data model is Relational Data Model.
Other types of data models include object-oriented data model, entity-relationship data model, document model and hierarchical data model. This book discusses the
DBMS based on relational data model.
In relational model, tables are called relations that store data for different columns. Each table can have
Limitations of DBMS
Increased Complexity:
Use of DBMS increases the complexity of maintaining functionalities like security, consistency, sharing and integrity
Increased data vulnerability:
As data are stored centrally, it increases the chances of loss of data due to any failure of hardware or software. It can bring all operations to a halt for all the users.
Reprint 2026-27
DatabaSe ConCeptS 121 multiple columns where each column name should be unique. For example, each row in the table represents a related set of values. Each row of Table 8.5 represents a particular guardian and has related values viz. guardian’s
ID with guardian name, address and phone number.
Thus, a table consists of a collection of relationships.
It is important to note here that relations in a database are not independent tables, but are associated with each other. For example, relation ATTENDANCE has attribute
RollNumber which links it with corresponding student record in relation STUDENT. Similarly, attribute GUID is placed with STUDENT table for extracting guardian details of a particular student. If linking attributes are not there in appropriate relations, it will not be possible to keep the database in correct state and retrieve valid information from the database.
Figure 8.3 shows the relational database Student
Attendance along with the three relations (tables)
STUDENT, ATTENDANCE and GUARDIAN.
Table 8.7 Relation schemas along with its description of Student Attendance database
Relation Scheme Description of attributes
STUDENT(RollNumber,
SName, SDateofBirth,
RollNumber: unique id of the student
SName: name of the student
SDateofBirth: date of birth of the student
GUID: unique id of the guardian of the student
ATTENDANCE (AttendanceDate,
RollNumber,
AttendanceStatus)
AttendanceDate: date on which attendance is taken
RollNumber: roll number of the student
AttendanceStatus: whether present (P) or absent(A)
Note that combination of AttendanceDate and RollNumber will be unique in each record of the table
GUARDIAN(GUID,
GName, GPhone,
GAddress)
GUID: unique id of the guardian
GName: name of the guardian
GPhone: contact number of the guardian
GAddress: contact address of the guardian
Figure 8.3: Representing STUDENTATTENDANCE database using Relational Data Model
Reprint 2026-27
Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii 122
Each tuple (row) in a relation (table) corresponds to data of a real world entity (for example, Student,
Guardian, and Attendance). In the GUARDIAN relation (Table 8.5), each row represents the facts about the guardian and each column name in the GUARDIAN table is used to interpret the meaning of data stored under that column. A database that is modeled on relational data model concept is called Relational Database. Figure 8.4 shows relation GUARDIAN with some populated data.
Let us now understand the commonly used terminologies in relational data model using Figure 8.4.
i) ATTRIBUTE: Characteristic or parameters for which data are to be stored in a relation. Simply stated, the columns of a relation are the attributes which are also referred as fields. For example, GUID,
GName, GPhone and GAddress are attributes of relation GUARDIAN.
ii) TUPLE: Each row of data in a relation (table) is called a tuple. In a table with n columns, a tuple is a relationship between the n related values.
iii) DOMAIN: It is a set of values from which an attribute can take a value in each row. Usually, a data type is used to specify domain for an attribute. For example, in STUDENT relation, the attribute RollNumber takes integer values and hence its domain is a set of integer values. Similarly, the set of character strings constitutes the domain of the attribute SName.
iv) DEGREE: The number of attributes in a relation is called the Degree of the relation. For example, relation GUARDIAN with four attributes is a relation of degree 4.
Relation
GUID GName GPhone GAddress
444444444444 Amit Ahuja 5711492685 G-35, Ashok Vihar, Delhi
111111111111 Baichung Bhutia 3612967082 Flat no. 5, Darjeeling Appt., Shimla
101010101010 Himanshu Shah 4726309212 26/77, West Patel Nagar, Ahmedabad
333333333333 Danny Dsouza S -13, Ashok Village, Daman
466444444666 Sujata P. 3801923168 HNO-13, B- block, Preet Vihar, Madurai
Relation GuaRdian with 4 attribute/
Record/tuple/row
Facts about RELATION GUARDIAN:
1. Degree (Number of attributes) = 4
2. Cardinality (Number of rows/tuples/records) = 5
3. Relation is a flat file i.e, each column has a single value and each record has same number of columns
Figure 8.4: Relation GuaRdian with its attributes and tuples
Reprint 2026-27
