In this Chapter
» Concept of Communication
» Components of Data
Communication
» Measuring Capacity of
Communication Media
» Types of Data
Communication
» Switching Techniques
» Transmission Media
» Mobile Telecommunication
Technologies
» Protocol
“People already have bionic arms and legs that work by the power of thought. And we increasingly outsource mental and communicative activities to computers. We are merging with our smartphones.
Very soon, they will just be part of the body”
— Yuval Noah Harari
11.1 ConCept of CommuniCation
The term “Data Communication” comprises two words: Data and Communication. Data can be any text, image, audio, video, and multimedia files. Communication is an act of sending or receiving data. Thus, data communication refers to the exchange of data between two or more networked or connected devices. These devices must be capable of sending and receiving data over a communication medium. Examples of such devices include personal computers, mobile phones, laptops, etc. As we can see in Figure
11.1, four different types of devices — computer, printer, server and switch are connected to form the network. These devices are connected through a media to the network, which carry information from one end to other end.
11 Data Communication
Reprint 2026-27
Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii 204
Central Server
Sharing Printer connected to Switch
Figure 11.1: A simple network of computing devices
11.2 Components of Data CommuniCation
Whenever we talk about communication between two computing devices using a network, five most important aspects come to our mind. These are sender, receiver, communication medium, the message to be communicated, and certain rules called protocols to be followed during communication. The communication media is also called transmission media. Figure
11.2 shows the role of these five components in data communication.
Figure 11.2: Components of data communication
Sender: A sender is a computer or any such device which is capable of sending data over a network. It can be a computer, mobile phone, smartwatch, walkie- talkie, video recording device, etc.
Receiver: A receiver is a computer or any such device which is capable of receiving data from the network.
It can be any computer, printer, laptop, mobile phone, television, etc. In computer communication, the sender and receiver are known as nodes in a network.
Transmission
Receiver
Activity 11.1
List various types of senders on a network.
Reprint 2026-27
