Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii 216
5G networks have also come into being. 4G is much faster than 3G and this has revolutionised the field of telecommunication by bringing the wireless experience to a new level altogether. 4G systems support interactive multimedia, voice, video, wireless internet and other broadband services. Technologically, 4G is very different compared to 3G.
The fifth generation or 5G is currently under development. It is expected to be a milestone development for the success of IoT and Machine to Machine (M2M)
communications. Machine to machine (M2M) is direct communication between devices — wired and wireless.
5G is expected to allow data transfer in Gbps, which is much faster than 4G. It is expected to be able to support all the devices of the future such as connected vehicles and the Internet of Things.
11.8 protoCol
In communication, Protocol is a set of standard rules that the communicating parties — the sender, the receiver, and all other intermediate devices need to follow. We know that the sender and receiver can be parts of different networks, placed at different geographic locations. Besides, the data transfer rates in different networks can vary, requiring data to be sent in different formats.
11.8.1 Need for Protocols
We need protocols for different reasons such as flow control, access control, addressing, etc. Flow control is required when the sender and receiver have different speeds of sending and receiving the data. Figure 11.14 shows that Computer A is sending data at the speed of 1024 Mbps and computer B is receiving data at the speed of 512 Mbps. In this case, Computer B must be able to inform computer A about the speed mismatch so that computer A can adjust its data transmission rate. Otherwise some data will be lost, as shown in
Figure 11.14.
Access control is required to decide which nodes in a communication channel will access the link shared among them at a particular instant of time. Otherwise, the transmitted data packets will collide if computers are sending data simultaneously through the same link resulting in the loss or corruption of data.
Explore how 5G can impact society.
Reprint 2026-27
