Chapter 2 — The Invisible Living World: Beyond Our Naked Eye 11
Activity 2.2: Let us study a cell (Teacher demonstration activity)
z Take an onion bulb from your kitchen or garden and wash it thoroughly with water.
z Cut the onion bulb vertically into pieces.
z Take one piece of onion and pull out the thin, transparent layer from its inner surface with the help of forceps. This layer is called the onion peel.
z Place the peel in a petri dish containing a few drops of safranin (red-coloured stain) for 30 seconds. This will give a pinkish colour to the cells and help us see them clearly.
z With the help of thin brush transfer the onion peel to another petri dish containing water to rinse the peel and remove extra stain.
z Now, carefully place the stained onion peel on the glass slide using a thin brush, ensuring it does not break or fold.
z Put a drop of glycerin over the onion peel on the slide. The glycerin will prevent drying of the cells and improve clarity for better visualisation of cells.
z Slowly place a coverslip over the peel using a needle, such that no air bubbles get trapped.
z Use blotting paper to gently wipe off any extra glycerin around the edges of the coverslip.
z Observe the slide under a microscope (A simple foldable paper microscope will suffice).
Compare it with Fig. 2.3c.
z What similarities do you find in
Fig. 2.3c and Fig. 2.3d?
You will observe nearly rectangular structures under the microscope. These are the cells of the onion peel, which are closely arranged without any space between them. Try to observe the peels of the leaves of different plants around you. You will find that all plants are made up of cells. What do you think the body of an animal is made of?
Fig. 2.3: (a) Removing onion peel from an onion bulb
Fig. 2.3: (b) Mounting the onion peel in glycerin using a needle; (c) Structure of onion peel under the microscope; and (d) A wall made of brick
Cell wall
Cytoplasm membrane
One drop of safranin Glycerin
Microscope
Onion peel
Cover slip
Reprint 2026-27
Curiosity — Textbook of S cience for G rade 8
Activity 2.3: Let us investigate z Rinse your mouth with clean water.
z Use the blunt end of a clean toothpick, and gently scrape the inside of your cheek.
z Place the scraped material in a drop of water on a clean glass slide and spread it evenly.
z Add a drop of methylene blue (a blue-coloured stain) over the material on slide. Adding stain improves the visibility of the material under the microscope by increasing contrast.
z After one minute, add a drop of glycerin over the material on the slide to prevent the cells from drying.
z Now, carefully place a clean coverslip on the material, and remove the excess glycerin from the edges of the coverslip using blotting paper.
z Observe the slide under a microscope and draw what you see in your notebook.
What did you observe? You will observe a polygon- shaped structure as shown in Fig. 2.4. These are cheek cells, which form the inner lining of your mouth.
What similarities and differences did you observe between the cells of onion peel in Activity 2.2 and human cheek cells in Activity 2.3?
You have observed that cells have three main parts.
The outer layer is called the cell membrane. The round structure in the middle is the nucleus, which is also covered by a thin membrane. The space between the cell membrane and nucleus is filled with cytoplasm. These three — cell membrane, cytoplasm, and nucleus — are the basic parts of a cell. Some cells, like onion peel cells, have an extra outer layer called the cell wall. What is the importance of these structures in a cell? What functions do they perform? Are these functions important for the maintenance of life?
The cell membrane encloses the cytoplasm and nucleus. The cell membrane separates one cell from another. It is porous and allows the entry of materials essential for life processes and the exit of waste material.
Cytoplasm contains other components of the cell and compounds, such as carbohydrates, proteins, fats, and mineral salts. Most of the life processes take place within the cytoplasm.
Fig. 2.4: Mount of human cheek cells
Cytoplasm
Cell membrane
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 2 — The Invisible Living World: Beyond Our Naked Eye 13
The nucleus regulates all activities that occur within the cell.
It also regulates growth.
The cell wall in the plant cell provides rigidity and strength to plants. This is why all cells are arranged compactly with each other and look firm in structure.
A step further
Cells in all parts of a plant have tiny rod-shaped structures called plastids. Some plastids, like chloroplasts, contain chlorophyll, which makes them green and helps in photosynthesis. In non-green parts, they help in the storage of substances. Plant cells also have a large, empty-looking space called a vacuole. This helps the plant cell store important substances, get rid of waste, and maintain the shape of the cell. This gives strength and support to the plant. In animal cells, vacuoles are usually not present, if present, they are usually small.
These small vacuoles store certain substances dissolved in water (Fig. 2.5). So, a cell is not just a simple bag of liquid — it is a complex structure made up of many different parts, each with its own special function to allow the cell, and in turn the entire organism to work.
Cell wall
Cell membrane
Cytoplasm
Chloroplast
Mitochondria
Fig. 2.5: A schematic drawing of (a) An animal cell and (b) A plant cell.
(The colours are to show different parts of the cell)
We have now understood the basic structure of cell. And we now also understand that plant and animal cells differ in shape and structure.
Do different animal cells also vary in their shape and structure?
2.1.1 Variation in shape and structure of cells
The muscle cell and the nerve cell of a human are shown in Fig. 2.6a and (b). What are the similarities and differences you see in them?
A muscle cell (Fig. 2.6a) is shaped like a spindle, while a nerve cell (Fig. 2.6b) is very long and has branches. Similarly, some cells are round in shape, while others are long and thin. The number of cells also varies in different organisms. Why do cells look so different from each other? Does the shape and structure of a cell relate to its function?
(a) Muscle cell (b) Nerve cell
Fig. 2.6: Different types of cells in humans
Reprint 2026-27
