Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
The unique shape, size, and structure of cells help them carry out their specific functions. But how do these cells help in performing various functions in the body? Let us find out.
You observed in Activity 2.3 that inner cheek cells are thin and flat. They form a protective lining on the inner surface of the cheek. Nerve cells also known as neurons carry messages in our body. The elongated shape and branched structure help them reach different parts of the body and pass on messages quickly.
Similarly, plant cells also show variation. In plants, too, cells may be rectangular, elongated, oval, or even tube-like. Some plant cells form long tubes that help carry water throughout the plant.
You have already studied the digestive system in Grade 7. Different parts of the digestive system are made up of different types of cells.
A group of muscle cells are present in the food pipe. These cells contract and relax in a wave-like manner, pushing the food down to the stomach. This movement is possible because muscle cells are thin, flexible, and spindle-shaped. The stomach also has different types of cells for performing different functions. Muscle cells in the stomach wall help churn the food. Other cells in the inner lining of the stomach produce digestive juices and acid that help break down the food. All these cells work together to make digestion possible.
2.2 What Are the Levels of Organisation in the Body of a Living Organism?
The body of a living organism is organised in a complex way. Cell (Fig. 2.7a), is the basic unit of life, just like a brick is the basic unit of wall (Fig. 2.3d). A group of similar cells forms a type of tissue (Fig. 2.7b).
Different tissues are organised to form an organ (Fig. 2.7c). Several organs work together to form an organ system that performs a major function of the body (Fig. 2.7d). All the organ systems together make up a complete organism (Fig. 2.7e) — like a plant or an animal.
So, the levels of organisations are:
Cell Tissue Organ Organ system Organism
These levels of organisation help us understand how simple building blocks like cells come together to form a complex living being.
The life of complex living organisms begins with a single cell—
‘egg’. The egg of any organism has an amazing ability to divide repeatedly to form a complete living being made up of many cells.
Such living beings are called multicellular organisms. Animals, including humans, and plants are all examples of multicellular organisms.
(d) Organ (a) Cell (b) Tissue (e) Organism
Fig. 2.7: Levels of organisation of life (c) Organ
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 2 — The Invisible Living World: Beyond Our Naked Eye 15
Ever heard of ...
The yolk (the yellow part of an egg) of an ostrich egg is a single cell — the largest known cell in the living world — measuring about 130 mm to 170 mm in diameter. The egg contains extra non-cellular material: a shell for protection and a white liquid that nourishes the cell during its continued development.
2.3 What Are Microorganisms?
Some living organisms are made up of just one or very few cells.
They are so small that they can not be seen with the naked eye.
These are called microorganisms. Some microorganisms, like bacteria and Amoeba, are made of just one cell (unicellular). Others, like some fungi and algae, have many cells (multicellular). They are found all around us — in water, soil, air, and even inside our body! But what do their cells look like? Are they like the plant and animal cells we just learnt about, or are they different? To observe the cells of a microorganism, again, we need to use a microscope which magnifies their size and makes them visible to us. Scientists have also created a low-cost and foldable paper microscope. Such foldable paper microscope may not provide the same level of details like high-powered laboratory microscopes. However, these make microscopic world accessible to many people.
Let us now take a closer look at the fascinating world of microbes.
Activity 2.4: Let us observe pond water/ stagnant water z Take a container and collect pond or stagnant water in it with the help of your teacher or elder(s).
z Use a dropper and place a drop of pond or stagnant water on a microscope slide. Put a coverslip and observe it under the microscope.
z Observe the tiny organisms found in the pond or stagnant
Activity 2.5: Let us observe soil suspension z Take a beaker and collect some moist soil in it from the nearby field or garden. Do not touch the soil with your bare hands — use a spoon or gloves.
Reprint 2026-27
Curiosity — Textbook of S cience f or G rade 8 z Pour some water into the beaker and stir it with a glass rod.
The liquid, which may look dirty, has very fine particles of soil, and is called soil suspension. Keep it aside for some time and let the mixture settle.
z Use a dropper and take a drop of water from the top layer.
Place the drop on a microscope slide.
z Cover it gently with a coverslip and observe it under the microscope (Fig. 2.8).
You may observe small moving organisms similar to those you saw in Activity 2.4. This indicates that even soil suspension contains a variety of tiny creatures that cannot be seen with the unaided eye.
The tiny creatures that cannot be seen with the naked eye are called microorganisms (micro means very small; organisms means living beings) or microbes.
Activity 2.6: Let us study
A group of students studying in Grade 8 performed Activities
2.4 and 2.5. They also collected information from the library and internet. They recorded the data obtained after observing pond water in Table 2.1 and the data obtained after observing soil suspension in Table 2.2. They identified the microorganisms as protozoa, algae, fungi, and bacteria. You can also conduct the same activity and record if you find any of these categories of organisms.
Table 2.1: Organisms present in pond water
S.No. Microorganisms observed Recorded data (Protozoa) Single cell, moving, irregular shape
Paramecium (Protozoa)
Single cell, moves from one place to another, movement takes place with the help of specialised structures
3. Algae
Single cell, looks green because of the presence of green pigment, movement takes place with the help of specialised structures
Fig. 2.8: Observation of soil suspension under the microscope
Reprint 2026-27
