Curiosity — T extbook of S cience f or G rade 8
2.4 How Are We Connected to Microbes?
Can we find microorganisms in other places, too?
Let us have a discussion:
Have you ever seen a lemon, tomato, orange, or any other food item rot after being left outside for some time? If yes, you may have noticed a powdery or cotton-like growth on them (Fig. 2.9). This happens because they have been infected by microbes. But where did these microbes come from? How did they come in contact with the food?
This happens because microorganisms can be found everywhere, be it in water, soil, air, or even in some food items.
You can use a microscope to explore surfaces of leaves, stems, roots, or any other part to see them. Like plants and animals, microorganisms also show great diversity.
Some of them can even be found in extreme climatic conditions, such as hot water springs and snow cold zones as well as at moderate temperatures. You already know some of these organisms live inside our bodies, especially in our gut! You have studied in the chapter ‘Life Processes in Animals’ in
Curiosity, Grade 7 that our intestine has many bacteria that help in digestion. Like plants and animals, microorganisms vary in shape, size, and structure. In Tables 2.1 and 2.2, you would have observed microorganisms of different shapes — spherical, rod-shape, or irregular.
How does the diversity of microorganisms play a role in our daily life? How do they help clean the environment?
2.4.1 Key players in cleaning the environment
Let us attempt to understand this by doing an activity.
Activity 2.7: Let us do z Take an empty container and fill it halfway with garden soil.
z Add some fruit and vegetable peels to the container.
Thereafter, put a layer of soil on it and leave it aside.
This is because you add many spices with salt or sugar to it which act as preservatives. High concentration of salt or sugar do not allow these organisms to grow on them.
But why do microorganisms not infect the pickles and murabbas?
Fig. 2.9: Fruit with microorganism growing on it
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 2 — The Invisible Living World: Beyond Our Naked Eye 19 z After 2–3 weeks, observe the changes that have taken place.
z Do you observe any difference in the contents of the container?
You may find that peels of fruits and vegetables have turned into a dark-coloured material. This is manure, which is rich in nutrients and helps increase the fertility of the soil. But how did the peels of fruits and vegetables turn into manure?
In Activity 2.6, you saw that soil contains various kinds of microorganisms. Some of these microorganisms, like fungi and bacteria, act on the plant waste and slowly break it down into simpler, nutrient-rich manure. You may have seen gardeners in your school or in a field near your house collecting dry leaves and plant waste and putting them into pits. Do you now understand why they do this? It is to make natural manure.
Ancient Indian texts, particularly the Vedas, have references of the word ‘Krimi’ which means different tiny entities including
‘Drishya’ (visible) and ‘Adrishya’ (invisible). Various Vedic texts mention their beneficial and harmful effects.
Atharvaveda also refers to ‘Krimi’.
Our scientific heritage
If you look around carefully, you might see decaying plants and fallen leaves stored in a container or lying in the garden, disappear after some time from the surroundings. This is because microorganisms breakdown the complex substances of fallen leaves into simpler substances that are rich in nutrients — a process called decomposition. These nutrients go back to the soil and help plants grow better. Microorganisms also decompose bodies of dead animals. So, microbes help recycle the waste and return important nutrients to nature. Manure formation occurs at optimal temperature and appropriate moisture level.
Isn’t it interesting? By now, you must have understood that bacteria and some fungi are types of microorganisms that play an important role in our lives. And guess what, these helpful bacteria can also decompose animal wastes like dung!
From Activity 2.7, we can also infer that microorganisms not only help in plant growth, but also clean our environment by breaking down waste.
Fig. 2.10: Recycling of nutrients by making
Reprint 2026-27
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
Now, think what would have happened if microorganisms did not exist on Earth?
A step further
Microbes as a source of biogas
Many microorganisms, like bacteria and fungi, live in an oxygen- free environment. Some of these bacteria have the ability to decompose plant and animal waste present in the environment or household wastewater. During the process, they release a mixture of gases called biogas primarily composed of carbon dioxide, and a high proportion of another gas, methane. This gas has been used as a fuel source for cooking, heating, generating electricity, and to even run vehicles.
Be a scientist
Ananda Mohan Chakrabarty (1938–2020) was a scientist who studied bacteria. In 1971, he developed a special bacterium that could break down oil spills, helping to clean the environment. His discovery received a patent in 1980. Patent is a copyright given to a person so that no one else can copy, use or sell his/her invention without permission. His work showed how microorganisms could be used to solve environmental problems like pollution. He is remembered for his contributions to science and for protecting the environment using microbes. What are the other problems which you think can be solved with the help of microorganisms?
How does the diversity of microorganisms help in our kitchen?
2.4.2 Microorganisms and food
Let us try to understand by performing activities in the kitchen.
Activity 2.8: Let us perform z Take two bowls A and B.
z In each, take 200 g of flour (atta or maida) and add a pinch of sugar.
z Now, in bowl A, add a small amount of yeast powder and mix it well with the flour.
z In bowl B, do not add any yeast, so that we can compare the results of the two bowls.
z Knead the flour of the two bowls with warm water to make soft dough (Fig. 2.11).
(a) Dough in bowl A (b) Dough in bowl B
Fig. 2.11: Change in the volume of flour after addition of yeast, sugar, and warm water
Reprint 2026-27
