Chapter 2 — The Invisible Living World: Beyond Our Naked Eye 21 z Cover the dough with a damp cloth and keep it in a warm place.
z Observe both the bowls after 4–5 hours.
Did you find any change in the volume, smell, or texture of the dough? If not, leave the dough for some more time. After some time, you may notice that the dough in bowl A, where yeast was added, has risen slightly, become fluffy, and has a different smell compared to the dough kneaded without yeast. Why does this happen? What is the role of yeast? Why did we add sugar and warm water to the flour?
Yeast is a type of microorganism. It belongs to a group of microorganisms, called fungi. Yeast grows well in warm conditions. You may recall from chapter ‘Life Process in Animals’ in Grade 7 that, like other organisms, yeast also respires and breaks down food to release energy for their growth and carry out life processes. During this process, carbon dioxide is released, which forms bubbles that makes the dough soft and fluffy. Yeast also produces a small amount of alcohol during this process, which gives the dough a slightly different smell. This special property of yeast is used in the process of making breads, cakes, and more!
In addition to yeast, some bacteria, such as Lactobacillus, help in fermentation of batter for making idli and dosa, and dough for making bhatura.
Activity 2.9: Let us prepare z Take two small glass bowls — label them ‘A’ and ‘B’.
z Pour lukewarm milk in bowl A, and cold milk in bowl B.
z Now, add a small spoonful of curd to each bowl and mix well using a spoon.
z Cover both bowls. Keep bowl A in a warm place and bowl B in a cool place (like a refrigerator) for a few hours or overnight.
z Observe the changes in the glass bowls. Write your predictions and observations in Table 2.4.
Table 2.4: Testing for curd formation using milk in different conditions
Change in the appearance of milk
Change in the colour of milk Possible
Bowl A Bowl B Bowl A Bowl B
Prediction
Observation
Reprint 2026-27
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for G rade 8
You will observe that in bowl
A, the milk has turned into curd after a few hours and has become little sour. Whereas in bowl B, the milk has not curdled, but it might be a little sour. Do you know why this happens? The curd contains several types of bacteria. One of them is Lactobacillus. This bacterium feeds on the sugar in the milk (lactose), multiplies, and ferments the milk to form curd.
Instead of producing alcohol (like yeast), these bacteria produce lactic acid, which makes curd sour. These bacteria grow well in warm conditions. That is why curd is formed in bowl A but not in bowl B.
We can categorise the microorganisms into different categories, such as protozoa, fungi, bacteria, some algae, and more. Some bacteria, such as Rhizobium, form the swollen regions called nodules and live in them as shown in Fig. 2.12.
Roots of certain legumes, such as beans, peas, and lentils have root nodules that contain Rhizobium bacteria. These bacteria trap nitrogen from the air and make it useful for the plants.
This helps plants grow better without chemical fertilisers.
That is why farmers grow legumes in rotation with other crops.
This naturally increases the nitrogen in the soil and keeps it healthy for the next crop.
2.4.3 Amazing microalgae: tiny helpers in water
Microalgae are microscopic plant-like organisms that live in water, soil, air, and even on trees. They make their own food using sunlight. While doing this, they also release oxygen and produce more than half of the Earth’s oxygen supply. They are rich in nutrients and serve as a food source for many aquatic animals.
Some, like Spirulina, Chlorella, and Diatoms, are also used by humans as health supplements and medicines. Microalgae also help in cleaning water and are used to make biofuel.
However, pollution, climate change, and habitat destruction are threatening microalgal diversity and abundance. It is important to conserve these tiny organisms to protect the environment and maintain oxygen balance on Earth.
Fig. 2.12: Root nodules of Cowpea plant which contain Rhizobium
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 2 — The Invisible Living World: Beyond Our Naked Eye 23
Ever heard of ...
Spirulina, a microalga, is called a superfood because of its health benefits. Spirulina is also a good source of vitamin B12
, which is essential for our body. It is rich in protein—more than
60 per cent of its body weight—and only a small amount of fat and sugar.
Nowadays, farming of Spirulina is becoming a feasible livelihood opportunity. You can grow Spirulina easily by following these steps:
1. Set a clear glass tank in a bright place away from direct sunlight.
2. Cover the tank with a shade net, or keep the tank at a place with moderate temperature conditions.
3. Fill the tank with pond water.
4. Add living Spirulina collected from a
5. Stir the growing Spirulina twice a week.
6. After 3–6 weeks, Spirulina may be harvested from the tank by filtering it through a fine cloth.
Conservation of microalgae is a good practice for ensuring food security and livelihood development.
2.5 Why Is Cell Considered to Be a Basic Unit of Life?
The body of all living organisms are made up of tiny building blocks called cells. A single cell contains various components that help organisms perform various functions. The bodies of all plants and animals are made up of many cells. Therefore, they are called multicellular (many-celled) organisms. In multicellular organisms, cells carry out specialised functions individually but also cooperate with each other to increase the chance of survival.
Some microorganisms, such as bacteria and protozoa, are made up of just one cell.
These are called unicellular (single-celled)
organisms. They carry out all the functions necessary for their survival in a single cell.
Other microbes, like algae and fungi, are made up of one or more cells. For example, yeast is a unicellular fungus while mould is a multicellular fungus.
Nucleoid
Fig. 2.13: A bacterial cell showing the nucleoid region
Reprint 2026-27
