Chapter 3 — Health: The Ultimate Treasure 37
Be a scientist
Kamal Ranadive (1917–2001) was a pioneering biomedical researcher. She studied how hormones and certain viruses are linked to cancer, helping improve its treatment and prevention. Her work also showed how tobacco, diet, and pollution can raise the risk of cancer, highlighting the importance of a healthy lifestyle.
3.5 How to Prevent and Control Diseases?
You might have heard the phrase ‘Prevention is better than cure.’
It is important to protect ourselves from both communicable and non-communicable diseases.
Activity 3.6: Let us read
Odisha — community-led sanitation campaign
In Bhadrak district, Odisha, a community sanitation campaign helped more people build and use toilets. This reduced open defecation significantly, and improved child health, with fewer cases of diarrhoea and infections.
What do you infer from this case study? Simple steps like good sanitation can greatly reduce the spread of communicable diseases.
Find about such community campaigns held in your location. Share in your class and discuss with your peers about the impact of such initiatives.
Ability of the body to fight diseases
You would have noticed that some people get sick more frequently than others, although living in a similar environment. Do you know why? The natural ability of our body to fight diseases is known as immunity. Our body has a special system called the immune system that helps fight against diseases.
You might have taken some drops or injections in your childhood to protect yourself from certain diseases, such as polio, measles, tetanus, and hepatitis. These are vaccines that help prevent serious infections caused by viruses and bacteria.
A vaccine helps our body fight certain diseases by training the immune system to recognise and attack harmful germs, providing what is known as acquired immunity — protection developed after exposure to a pathogen or a vaccine. Vaccines can be made in different ways — from weakened or dead pathogens (like viruses or bacteria), or from inactive or harmless parts of the pathogen. Some newer vaccines instruct our own body cells
Reprint 2026-27
