Chapter 7 — Particulate Nature of Matter 107
7.3 How Does the Interparticle Spacing
Differ in the Three States of Matter?
What role does the interparticle spacing play in determining the properties of each state (solid, liquid, and gas)?
Let us perform the following activities to find answers to these questions.
Activity 7.6: Let us experiment z Take a syringe without a needle. Pull the plunger of the syringe outwards in a fully extended position (Fig. 7.9a).
z Place your thumb over the open end of the syringe to prevent the air present inside the syringe from escaping (Fig. 7.9b).
z Push the plunger slowly and steadily inward (Fig. 7.9c).
Fig. 7.9: The syringe piston in different positions (a) Pulling the plunger outwards (b) Placing thumb over the open end (c) Pushing the plunger inwards without a z What do you observe?
As you do this, you will notice that the volume of air inside the syringe decreases.
What can we say about the behaviour of gas in the syringe?
When you compress the air by pushing the plunger, the particles are forced to come closer. This shows that the gas particles have a lot of space between them in their natural state, and this space can be reduced by applying external pressure.
If you stop pushing the plunger, the gas particles spread, and the plunger moves back to its original position.
Repeat this activity using water and observe.
You would observe that water is practically incompressible.
Let us perform another activity to learn about the interparticle spaces in liquids.
Reprint 2026-27
Curiosity — T extbook of Science for Grade 8
Activity 7.7: Let us observe z Take a glass vessel, fill it about half with water, and mark the level of water A (Fig. 7.10a).
z Add two teaspoons of sugar into it.
z Mark the new water level on the glass vessel B (Fig. 7.10b).
z Stir the water with a glass rod to dissolve the sugar (Fig. 7.10c).
z Predict whether the water level will increase or decrease with respect to the mark B.
z Mark this water level again as C (Fig. 7.10d).
dissolved in water
Water Water
Glass rod (a) (b) (c)
Fig. 7.10: Variation in water levels
A Dissolving in water
What difference do you observe in the water levels?
You will observe that initially, when sugar is added, the level of water increases, but after dissolution, it may decrease to some extent. Since the volume of the solution is less than the sum of the volumes of water and sugar, it indicates that there is some space between the water particles.
The particles of the dissolved substance occupy these spaces (Fig. 7.11).
Repeat the Activity 7.7 with some other soluble solids, such as common salt or glucose, and insoluble solids, like sand and stone pieces.
What do you observe in each case? Do the sand particles dissolve? Does the volume of water in the vessel change after mixing, and why?
Sugar and sand are both solids. Why does sugar dissolve in water but sand does not?
Fig. 7.11: Magnified schematic picture of distribution of sugar particles in water particle particle
Reprint 2026-27
