Values and Dispositions
A Tale of Valour
Major Somnath Sharma and the Battle of Badgam
Let us do these activities before we read.
I Work in pairs. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher.
1. What do you think about the Republic Day Parade on 26 January?
2. What are the highlights of this parade?
3. What bravery awards are given on this day, and who receives them?
VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS
II Work in groups of four and discuss.
1. What qualities do you think a soldier should have?
2. If you had to share a message with a soldier, what would it be?
Reprint 2026-27
Let us read permanently fixed in someone’s beacon: a source of inspiration valour: courage
Mera desh, mera desh re
Mera desh hua re roshan, le qurban kiya tujh hee pe ye tan man…
Major Somnath Sharma (1923–1947)
Regiment Crest
This is a tribute to the valiant Major Somnath Sharma, India’s first recipient of the Param Vir Chakra, whose name is etched in the annals of history. His bravery and sacrifice stand as a beacon of inspiration for generations. At every intersection of patriotism—whether through the National War Memorial, soul stirring patriotic songs, books, and stories recounting acts of valour, or the celebrations of Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav— his memory is honoured. Major Somnath Sharma’s legacy of courage and devotion to the nation remains forever alive, forever alive… reminding us of the ultimate price paid for our freedom.
The serene Kashmir valley in the shadows of the majestic
Himalayas witnessed a tale of extraordinary heroism and
Reprint 2026-27
Values and Dispositions infiltrators:
people who secretly invade annex: to take possession of sacrifice to protect the integrity of Indian borders. The day began with the silence of a cold November dawn but ended with echoes of courage that served as an inspiration for generations to come.
This is the story of Major Somnath Sharma and the brave men that he led on a mission to protect the Srinagar airport from falling into the hands of a guerrilla force trained and backed by Pakistan. This is a story of how 90 men managed to foil the plan of some 500 infiltrators who wanted to capture
Srinagar and the Kashmir Valley and deliver a blow to newly-independent India.
The events that led to the Battle of Badgam started in August
1947, when Pakistan launched Operation Gulmarg to annex the
Kashmir Valley. This was in violation of an existing agreement with Hari Singh, the Maharaja of Jammu and Kashmir, who had committed Pakistan not to attack the state.
However, instead of honouring the commitment, the
Pakistani Army trained and equipped around 1000 invaders who possessed deep knowledge of mountain passes and the local terrain to enter Kashmir and take control of strategic locations, including the Srinagar airport. The ultimate goal of
Reprint 2026-27 their plan was to engineer a revolt in Kashmir, overthrow the government, and capture the territory. If they had succeeded, it would have allowed them to control strategic mountain passes, peaks, and rivers. On 22 October, Operation Gulmarg was launched and these infiltrators invaded Kashmir, which led to the Princely State becoming a part of India on
26 October 1947.
In response to this invasion, the Government of India sent its troops to defend the people of Kashmir and India’s borders on
27 October 1947. A contingent of troops posted to Jammu and
Kashmir was airlifted into Srinagar because the land route through Pathankot was not in a good condition.
On 31 October, the D Company of the 4th Battalion of Kumaon
Regiment, under the command of Major Somnath Sharma, was also flown into Srinagar. At that time, Major Somnath
Sharma’s left hand was in plaster, but he insisted on being with his company while in combat. He knew that this mission would be very challenging and told his senior officers, “I know my men better than anyone else, and if they are going into action, they are not going in without me.” These words highlighted his commitment to his men and his country.
Before their arrival in Srinagar, there had been unfounded rumours of tribal movement towards the village of Badgam, less than 5 kilometres away from the Srinagar airport. The village was on a higher altitude than the airfield, and access was through the village. Hence, it was important for Indian forces to retain control of the area in order to protect troops and facilitate supplies arriving via air.
In reality, the enemy had started arriving in Badgam in small groups to avoid detection. On 03 November 1947, several companies, including Major Somnath Sharma’s D Company, were sent to patrol and assess emerging threats in and around the village. Throughout the day, the valley was eerily silent.
Around afternoon, the companies were ordered to return one by one. D company with 90 soldiers was the last, and they were expected to return by 2:00 p.m.
When the enemy (tribal guerrilla invaders), under the command of the Pakistani army, saw that only a small group combat: a unfounded: not based on reason or facts eerily: in a strange, frightening and mysterious way
Reprint 2026-27
Values and Dispositions of Indian soldiers were left behind in Badgam, they attacked them. Their initial attack was met with stiff resistance by Major
Somnath and his men. However, Major Somnath correctly visualised that the first attack was just a distraction. Shortly thereafter, a major attack came from another side. By then,
Major Somnath Sharma and his 90 soldiers were facing about
500 invaders.
The Pakistani invaders sought to capture the Srinagar airfield and its surrounding areas. It was clear to Major Somnath
Sharma that defending Srinagar town, the airfield, and the wider valley was indeed difficult until reinforcements arrived.
After assessing the situation, he requested air strikes. He bravely laid out ground panels to guide the aircraft towards their target. The aerial attacks were successful in hitting the tribal invaders, but they still outnumbered D Company by almost seven to one, the attack on the positions occupied by
Major Somnath’s men continued.
Vastly outnumbered and facing devastating fire, Major
Somnath Sharma and his men stood resolute. The air was thick with the sound of gunfire and the cries of battle, but
Major Somnath Sharma’s voice cut through the chaos, urging his men to fight with tenacity and valour.
Despite heavy casualties and his own injuries, Major Somnath
Sharma displayed unparalleled bravery. He moved fearlessly through the battlefield, directing fire, filling magazines for his gunners, and encouraging his men to hold their ground.
outnumbered:
were greater in resolute:
determined tenacity:
determination unparalleled:
unmatched magazines:
(here) containers that hold cartridges to be fed into a gun
Reprint 2026-27
However, as the battle progressed, D Company began running out of ammunition. When Major Somnath Sharma informed
Brigade headquarters about this, he was asked to pull back.
Aware of the gravity of the situation, he responded with the words, “The enemy is only 50 yards from us. We are heavily outnumbered. We are under devastating fire. I shall not withdraw an inch but will fight to the last man and the last round”.
Just a few minutes later, when he was crouched in a trench next to a machine gun operator, in order to help him load the gun, his position was hit by a mortar shell, killing him instantly.
Despite losing their Major and faced with the overwhelming numerical superiority of the enemy, the heroic actions of late Major Somnath Sharma motivated his men to hold on to their position for over six more hours before being overrun by the enemy.
Their brave resistance provided time for reinforcements to arrive, including flying in soldiers from the Punjab regiment to Srinagar. The heroic deeds of Major Somnath and his men thoroughly demotivated the enemy, causing more than 300 casualties, including injuring their leader.
In many significant ways, D Company’s sacrifice and
Major Somnath’s leadership saved Srinagar for India. The
4 KUMAON battalion was awarded the Battle Honour,
Srinagar. Major Somnath laid down his life for the nation at the young age of 24. For this act of conspicuous bravery, Major
Somnath Sharma was awarded the Param Vir Chakra (PVC).
His citation reflects his heroism, patriotism, and courage. He was the first recipient of the PVC, awarded posthumously for gallantry and supreme sacrifice.
crouched: sat with knees bent ammunition:
a supply of bullets, shells, and explosives conspicuous:
noticeable posthumously:
after death
“I shall not withdraw an inch but will fight to the last man and the last round”
Major Somnath Sharma, PVC
Reprint 2026-27
Values and Dispositions
Reprint 2026-27
We have delved into how the events of 03 November 1947, played out. It is also worth knowing more about the early life of Major Somnath and the events that led him to make the ultimate sacrifice for the nation.
Born on 31 January 1923, in the picturesque town of Dadh in
Kangra, Himachal Pradesh, Somnath Sharma belonged to a family with a rich military legacy. His father, Major General
Amar Nath Sharma, had served the nation with distinction.
Young Somnath was also deeply inspired by the valorous tales of the Mahabharata, imparted to him by his grandfather.
From his early education at Sherwood College, Nainital, to his rigorous training at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst,
Major Somnath Sharma’s life was a testament to discipline and dedication. Commissioned into the 8th Battalion,
19th Hyderabad Regiment in 1942, he served with distinction during World War II in the Arakan Campaign in Burma, earning mentions in despatches for his bravery. However, it was during the Indo–Pakistan War of 1947–1948, particulary in the battle of Badgam, that the legacy of Major Somnath
Sharma was truly forged.
The life and sacrifice of Major Somnath Sharma embody the highest ideals of duty, honour, and patriotism. He has been a source of inspiration for soldiers and citizens alike. Most importantly, his story is a reminder of the sacrifices made by countless men and women in defence of the motherland and highlights the profound sense of duty that inspired them.
despatches:
official reports on military forged: shaped or strengthened, often through hardship legacy: life experiences, values, beliefs, and traditions passed down from generation to generation testament:
strong evidence or proof
Reprint 2026-27
Values and Dispositions
Reprint 2026-27
Honour Wall with Names of Bravehearts at the National War Memorial
Medal of Honour
In the quiet of the Kashmir Valley, where the echoes of
D Company’s battle with infiltrators have long since faded, the story of Major Somnath Sharma remains a beacon of courage and sacrifice. His valour ensured that the tricolour would continue to fly over Srinagar, and his name is forever etched in the golden pages of India’s military history. The life and legacy of Major Somnath Sharma stands as a poignant reminder of the price of freedom and the enduring spirit of those who fought to protect it. His story, marked by selflessness and bravery, will continue to inspire and guide generations to come, ensuring that his sacrifice is never to be forgotten. His name is etched on the Honour Wall of the
National War Memorial.
poignant:
emotional and
Reprint 2026-27
Values and Dispositions
Let us discuss
I Arrange the following events in chronological order. The first and the last events have been marked for you. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher.
1. Major Somnath Sharma was born in 1923 in Kangra,
Himachal Pradesh. (1)
2. Even after losing Major Somnath Sharma, the soldiers fought bravely to save Srinagar for India.
3. The D Company, under the command of Major Somnath Sharma, was flown into Srinagar.
4. Major Somnath Sharma underwent training at the Royal Military
College, Sandhurst.
5. Major Somnath Sharma requested air strikes to combat the enemy at Badgam.
6. Major Somnath Sharma was commissioned into the 19th Hyderabad
Regiment in 1942.
7. Major Somnath Sharma was killed immediately after a mortar shell hit him.
8. Major Somnath Sharma was the first recipient of the Param
Vir Chakra. (8)
Let us think and reflect
I Read the given extracts and answer the questions that follow.
1. Vastly outnumbered and facing devastating fire, Major Somnath
Sharma and his men stood resolute. The air was thick with the sound of gunfire and the cries of battle, but Major Somnath Sharma’s voice cut through the chaos, urging his men to fight with tenacity and valour.
Let us salute this braveheart.
Vande Mataram, vande mataraṁ
Sujalam suphalam malayaja shitalam,
Shasya shyamalam ṃataram!
Vande Mataram, vande mataram vande mataram…
Jai Hind
Reprint 2026-27
Despite heavy casualties and his own injuries, Major Somnath
Sharma displayed unparalleled bravery. He moved fearlessly through the battlefield, directing fire, filling magazines for his gunners, and encouraging his men to hold their ground.
(i) What can be inferred about the conditions from the line: ‘The air was thick with gunfire...’
A. The gunshots had stopped for a while.
B. There was intense fighting on the battlefield.
C. The invaders were retreating from the fight.
D. The Indian soldiers had achieved victory.
(ii) Complete the sentence with a suitable reason.
Despite heavy casualties, Major Somnath Sharma continued to lead his men because ________________________________________.
(iii) Select the correct option for both Assertion (A) and Reason (R)
given below:
(A): Major Somnath Sharma moved fearlessly through the battlefield, even though he was injured.
(R): He believed his courage was important to motivate the soldiers.
A. Both (A) and (R) are true, and (R) is the correct explanation
B. Both (A) and (R) are true, but (R) is not the correct explanation
C. (A) is true, but (R) is false.
D. (A) is false, but (R) is true.
(iv) Fill in the blank with the correct word from those given in the brackets:
Major Somnath Sharma was filling magazines, and encouraging his men to hold their ground despite ___________________________.
(injuries/worry)
2. Born on 31 January 1923, in the picturesque town of Dadh in Kangra,
Himachal Pradesh, Somnath Sharma belonged to a family with a rich military legacy. His father, Major General Amar Nath Sharma, had served the nation with distinction, and young Somnath was deeply inspired by the valorous tales of the Mahabharata, imparted to him by his grandfather.
Reprint 2026-27
Values and Dispositions (i) What can be inferred about Somnath Sharma’s early influences on his career?
A. He was primarily influenced by his father’s achievements in the military.
B. His inspiration came solely from the tales of the Mahabharata.
C. His family and heritage inspired his bravery and sense of
D. He decided to join the military out of necessity rather than passion.
(ii) Identify whether the following statement is true or false:
Somnath Sharma belonged to a wealthy family.
(iii) What does the phrase ‘served the nation with distinction’ tell us about Major General Amar Nath Sharma?
(He performed his duties with exceptional dedication, honour, and excellence./He was highly respected for his contributions to the country.)
(iv) Replace the underlined phrase with a word from the extract that has a similar meaning.
My family and I visited a popular hill station and stayed in an old but visually charming house surrounded by trees.
II Answer the following questions.
1. ‘Major Somnath’s legacy of courage and devotion to the nation remains forever alive, forever alive…’ What is the significance of the repetition in this line?
2. Why do you think Major Somnath’s leadership was critical during the Battle of Badgam?
3. What were Major Somnath’s last words? What do they reflect about his sense of duty?
4. What might have been the outcome of the Battle of Badgam if Major
Somnath and his company had not held their ground?
5. Why do you think Major Somnath’s story continues to inspire soldiers and civilians today?
6. How can the values demonstrated by Major Somnath Sharma— courage, duty, and self-sacrifice—be applied in our daily lives?
Reprint 2026-27
Let us learn
I Match the expressions from the text in Column 1 with the most suitable situations given in Column 2.
Column 1 Column 2
1. Fight to the last man (i) A sports team scores a last-minute goal, giving them the lead and shaking the opponent’s confidence.
2. Foil the plan (ii) The soldiers fought valiantly until each one laid down his life for the
3. Deliver a blow (iii) Soldiers stay in their position and fight back, even though the enemy is stronger.
4. Hold their ground (iv) A spy disrupts the enemy’s efforts to invade a country by intercepting their communications.
Now, complete the following sentences using the expressions from
Column 1.
A. The detective managed to ______________ by finding the hidden evidence before the culprit could get rid of it.
B. The company’s new advertising campaign was meant to ______________ to their competitors’ sales.
C. The hikers chose to ______________ despite the heavy rain, refusing to turn back on their journey.
D. Despite being heavily outnumbered, the soldiers vowed to defend their homeland and ______________, refusing to surrender to the enemy forces.
II Read the highlighted words in the following sentence from the text.
A contingent of troops posted to Jammu and Kashmir was air-lifted into Srinagar…
There are many such collective nouns used in the context of armed forces.
Match the collective nouns in Column 1 to their meanings in Column 2.
You may refer to a dictionary.
Reprint 2026-27
Values and Dispositions
Column 1 Column 2
1. regiment (i) a large body of troops ready for battle, especially an infantry unit
2. squadron (ii) a permanent unit of an army typically commanded by a lieutenant colonel/colonel and divided into several companies
3. fleet (iii) a small unit, typically comprising 12–24 aircrafts and their crews used in air force, naval, or army aviation services.
4
