The Cherry Tree
Let us do these activities before we read.
I Work in pairs and answer the questions that follow. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher.
1. Have you ever used a seed or a sapling to grow a plant?
2. What kind of care did the plant need? Who helped you with it?
3. How did you feel when you saw the plant grow?
II What kind of trees do people plant in their homes? Why is it important to plant trees?
III Name some fruit trees that grow in your region. What type of conditions help these fruit trees to grow?
ENVIRONMENT
Reprint 2026-27
Let us read
One day, when Rakesh was six, he walked home from the Mussoorie bazaar eating cherries. They were a little sweet, a little sour; small, bright red cherries, which had come all the way from the
Kashmir Valley.
Here in the Himalayan foothills where Rakesh lived, there were not many fruit trees. The soil was stony, and the dry cold winds stunted the growth of most plants. But on the more sheltered slopes there were forests of oak and deodar.
Rakesh lived with his grandfather on the outskirts of Mussoorie, just where the forest began. His father and mother lived in a small village fifty miles away, where they grew maize and rice and barley in narrow terraced fields on the lower slopes of the mountain.
But there were no schools in the village, and Rakesh’s parents were keen that he should go to school. As soon as he was of school-going age, they sent him to stay with his grandfather in
Mussoorie.
He had a little cottage outside the town.
Rakesh was on his way home from school when he bought the cherries. He paid fifty paise for the bunch. It took him about half-an-hour to walk home, and by the time he reached the cottage there were only three cherries left.
‘Have a cherry, Grandfather,’ he said, as soon as he saw his grandfather in the garden.
Grandfather took one cherry and Rakesh promptly ate the other two. He kept the last seed in his mouth for some time, stunted: stopped (from growing to the usual size)
outskirts: the areas that form the edge of a town or city
Reprint 2026-27
Environment yielding: giving way under pressure tang: a strong, sharp taste rolling it round and round on his tongue until all the tang had gone. Then he placed the seed on the palm of his hand and studied it.
‘Are cherry seeds lucky?’ asked
‘Of course.’
‘Then I’ll keep it.’
‘Nothing is lucky if you put it away.
If you want luck, you must put it to some use.’ ‘What can I do with a seed?’
‘Plant it.’
So Rakesh found a small space and began to dig up a flowerbed.
‘Hey, not there,’ said
Grandfather. ‘I’ve sown mustard in that bed.
Plant it in that shady corner, where it won’t be disturbed.’
Rakesh went to a corner of the garden where the earth was soft and yielding. He did not have to dig.
He pressed the seed into the soil with his thumb and it went right in.
Then he had his lunch, and ran off to play cricket with his friends, and forgot all about the cherry seed.
When it was winter in the hills, a cold wind blew down from the snows and went whoo-whoo-whoo in the deodar trees, and the garden was dry and bare.
In the evenings Grandfather and Rakesh sat over a charcoal fire, and Grandfather told Rakesh stories—stories about people
Reprint 2026-27 who turned into animals, and ghosts who lived in trees, and beans that jumped and stones that wept—and in turn, Rakesh would read to him from the newspaper, Grandfather’s eyesight being rather weak. Rakesh found the newspaper very dull— especially after the stories—but Grandfather wanted all the news...
They knew it was spring when the wild duck flew north again, to Siberia. Early in the morning, when he got up to chop wood and light a fire, Rakesh saw the V-shaped formation streaming northward, the calls of the birds carrying clearly through the thin mountain air.
One morning in the garden he bent to pick up what he thought was a small twig and found to his surprise that it was well rooted.
He stared at it for a moment, then ran to fetch Grandfather, calling,
‘Dada, come and look, the cherry tree has come up!’
‘What cherry tree?’ asked
Grandfather, who had forgotten about it. ‘The seed we planted last year—look, it’s come up!’
Rakesh went down on his haunches, while Grandfather bent almost double and peered down at the tiny tree. It was about four inches high.
‘Yes, it’s a cherry tree,’ said
Grandfather. ‘You should water it now and then.’
Rakesh ran indoors and came back with a bucket of water.
‘Don’t drown it!’ said
Grandfather.
Rakesh gave it a sprinkling and circled it with pebbles.
haunches: sit on the feet with legs bent peered down:
looked carefully difficulty
Reprint 2026-27
Environment
‘What are the pebbles for?’ asked Grandfather.
‘For privacy,’ said Rakesh.
He looked at the tree every morning but it did not seem to be growing very fast, so he stopped looking at it except quickly, out of the corner of his eye. And, after a week or two, when he allowed himself to look at it properly, he found that it had grown—at least an inch!
That year the monsoon rains came early and Rakesh plodded to and from school in raincoat and chappals.
Ferns sprang from the trunks of trees, strange-looking lilies came up in the long grass, and even when it wasn’t raining the trees dripped and mist came curling up the valley. The cherry tree grew quickly in this season.
It was about two feet high when a goat entered the garden and ate all the leaves. Only the main stem and two thin branches remained.
‘Never mind,’ said Grandfather, seeing that Rakesh was upset.
‘It will grow again, cherry trees are tough.’ plodded: walked
Let us discuss
I Arrange the events in order of occurrence in the story.
Two have been done for you. Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher.
1. Rakesh discovered that the small, well-rooted twig, had grown into a cherry tree.
2. Rakesh was sent to live with his grandfather in Mussoorie.
3. Rakesh pressed the cherry seed into the soft soil with his thumb.
4. The cherry tree grew quickly after the rains arrived early.
Reprint 2026-27
5. Rakesh bought a bunch of cherries and ate most of them.
6. A goat entered the garden and ate all the leaves of the young cherry tree.
7. Rakesh’s parents grew maize, rice, and barley in a village. (1)
8. Rakesh sprinkled water on the cherry tree and surrounded it with pebbles.
9. Grandfather told Rakesh that cherry trees were tough.
10. Rakesh kept rolling the last cherry seed in his mouth.
II Do you think the cherry tree would survive? Why do you think so?
Towards the end of the rainy season new leaves appeared on the tree. Then a woman cutting grass scrambled down the hillside, her scythe swishing through the heavy monsoon foliage. She did not try to avoid the tree: one sweep, and the cherry tree was cut in two.
When Grandfather saw what had happened, he went after the woman and scolded her; but the damage could not be repaired.
‘Maybe it will die now,’ said
‘Maybe,’ said Grandfather.
But the cherry tree had no intention of dying.
By the time summer came round again, it had sent out several new shoots with tender green
Rakesh had grown taller too. He was eight now, a sturdy boy with curly black hair and deep black eyes. Blackberry eyes,
Grandfather called them.
That monsoon Rakesh went home to his village, to help his father and mother with the planting and ploughing and scrambled:
moved quickly and with difficulty scythe: a tool with a long, sharp, curved blade with a long handle foliage: green
Reprint 2026-27
Environment sowing. He was thinner but stronger when he came back to
Grandfather’s house at the end of the rains to find that the cherry tree had grown another foot. It was now up to his chest.
Even when there was rain, Rakesh would sometimes water the tree. He wanted it to know that he was there.
One day he found a bright green praying-mantis perched on a branch, peering at him with bulging eyes. Rakesh let it remain there; it was the cherry tree’s first visitor.
The next visitor was a hairy caterpillar, who started making a meal of the leaves. Rakesh removed it quickly and dropped it on a heap of dry leaves.
‘Come back when you’re a butterfly,’ he said.
Winter came early. The cherry tree bent low with the weight of snow. Field-mice sought shelter in the roof of the cottage.
The road from the valley was blocked, and for several days there was no newspaper, and this made Grandfather quite grumpy. His stories began to have unhappy endings.
In February it was Rakesh’s birthday.
He was nine—and the tree was four, but almost as tall as Rakesh.
One morning, when the sun came out,
Grandfather came into the garden to let some warmth ‘get into my bones,’ as he put it. He stopped in front of the cherry tree, stared at it for a few moments, and then called out, ‘Rakesh! Come and look!
Come quickly before it falls!’
Rakesh and Grandfather gazed at the tree as though it had performed a miracle. There was a pale pink blossom at the end of a branch.
The following year there were more blossoms.
And suddenly the tree was taller than Rakesh, even though it was less than half his age. And then it was taller than
Grandfather, who was older than some of the oak trees.
praying- mantis: an grumpy: bad- tempered gazed: looked at something for a long time with admiration
Reprint 2026-27
But Rakesh had grown too. He could run and jump and climb trees as well as most boys, and he read a lot of books, although he still liked listening to Grandfather’s tales.
In the cherry tree, bees came to feed on the nectar in the blossoms, and tiny birds pecked at the blossoms and broke them off. But the tree kept blossoming right through the spring, and there were always more blossoms than
That summer there were small cherries on the tree. Rakesh tasted one and spat it out.
‘It’s too sour,’ he said.
‘They’ll be better next year,’ said
Grandfather.
But the birds liked them—especially the bigger birds, such as the bulbuls and scarlet minivets—and they flitted in and out of the foliage, feasting on the cherries.
On a warm sunny afternoon, when even the bees looked sleepy, Rakesh was looking for Grandfather without finding him in any of his favourite places around the house. Then he looked out of the bedroom window and saw Grandfather reclining on a cane chair under the cherry tree.
‘There’s just the right amount of shade here,’ said Grandfather.
‘And I like looking at the leaves.’
‘They’re pretty leaves,’ said Rakesh. ‘And they are always ready to dance, if there’s a breeze.’
After Grandfather had come indoors, Rakesh went into the garden and lay down on the grass beneath the tree. He gazed up through the leaves at the great blue sky; and turning on his side, he could see the mountains striding away into the clouds.
flitted: flew reclining: lying
Reprint 2026-27
Environment
He was still lying beneath the tree when the evening shadows crept across the garden. Grandfather came back and sat down beside Rakesh, and they waited in silence until the stars came out and the nightjar began to call. In the forest below, the crickets and cicadas began tuning up; and suddenly the trees were full of the sound of insects.
‘There are so many trees in the forest,’ said Rakesh. ‘What’s so special about this tree? Why do we like it so much?’
‘We planted it ourselves,’ said Grandfather. ‘That’s why it’s special.’
‘Just one small seed,’ said Rakesh, and he touched the smooth bark of the tree that he had grown. He ran his hand along the trunk of the tree and put his finger to the tip of a leaf. ‘I wonder,’ he whispered. ‘Is this what it feels to be God?’
Ruskin Bond nightjar: a bird cicadas: insects known for their loud distinctive calls, especially during evenings
Reprint 2026-27
Let us discuss
I Complete the table given below based on your understanding of
Part II of the story. One example has been done for you. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher.
Cause Effect
1. A woman cut the cherry tree while cutting grass.
(i) Grandfather scolded the
2. (ii) Rakesh was thinner but stronger when he came back.
3. A hairy caterpillar started eating the leaves of the cherry tree.
4. (iv) Rakesh and Grandfather gazed at the tree as though it was a miracle.
5. Rakesh tasted one of the small cherries during summer.
Let us think and reflect
I Read the given extracts and answer the questions that follow.
1. “Have a cherry, Grandfather,” he said, as soon as he saw his grandfather in the garden.
Grandfather took one cherry and Rakesh promptly ate the other two.
He kept the last seed in his mouth for some time, rolling it round and round on his tongue until all the tang had gone. Then he placed the seed on the palm of his hand and studied it.
“Are cherry seeds lucky?” asked Rakesh.
“Of course.”
“Then I’ll keep it.”
“Nothing is lucky if you put it away. If you want luck, you must put it to some use.”
Reprint 2026-27
Environment (i) Substitute the underlined phrase with a correct word from the extract.
The Kho-kho captain changed her strategy quickly and without delay when a new player came in from the opposing team.
(ii) What does Rakesh’s action of rolling the cherry seed in his mouth most likely suggest about his mood at that moment?
A. He is feeling impatient and restless.
B. He is enjoying the taste and the moment.
C. He is bored and has nothing better to do.
D. He is thoughtful and feeling playful.
(iii) Complete the following sentence suitably with reference to
Rakesh and his grandfather.
Rakesh’s decision to plant the seed shows that ______________.
(he respects and values his grandfather’s advice/he has a close bond with his grandfather and a willingness to learn from him)
(iv) How does the grandfather’s advice reflect his view about luck and effort?
2. Winter came early. The cherry tree bent low with the weight of snow.
Field-mice sought shelter in the roof of the cottage. The road from the valley was blocked, and for several days there was no newspaper, and this made Grandfather quite grumpy. His stories began to have unhappy endings.
In February it was Rakesh’s birthday. He was nine—and the tree was four, but almost as tall as Rakesh.
(i) Complete the following sentence suitably.
The phrase ‘field-mice sought shelter in the roof of the cottage’ suggests that _____________.
(ii) What can be inferred about the cherry tree’s toughness from the line, ‘The cherry tree bent low with the weight of snow’?
A. The weight of the tree was more than the snow.
B. The tree could withstand harsh weather.
C. The tree was growing close to the ground.
D. The snow gave support to the tree.
(iii) How did the early winter affect Grandfather’s mood and storytelling?
Reprint 2026-27 (iv) Complete the sentence by choosing the correct option.
The comparison of Rakesh’s age to the cherry tree’s age symbolises _______________. (the tree’s growth paralleling
Rakesh’s own development/the tree standing as a dear one on
Rakesh’s birthday)
II Answer the following questions.
1. Why did Rakesh’s parents send him to Mussoorie?
2. Why did Rakesh let the praying-mantis remain on the branch of the cherry tree?
3. How is life in the Himalayan foothills described in the story?
4. What might Rakesh mean when he says, “Is this what it feels to be
God?” at the end of the story?
5. How does the writer describe the relationship between Rakesh and his grandfather?
6. What can you infer about the connection between humans and nature based on the story?
7. Imagine Rakesh reflects on his wonderful experience of watching a seed being transformed into a full-grown cherry tree. Write how he must have felt.
Let us learn
I Each word list has one word that does not match with the other words.
Identify the odd word. One example has been done for you.
1. chop, trim, slice, mince (‘chop’, ‘slice’ and ‘mince’ are words used for cutting with a knife;
whereas ‘trim’ is to cut a part with a pair of scissors)
2. plodded, galloped, scrambled, trudged
3. tender, delicate, soft, smooth
4. stared, peered, pecked, gazed
5. growing, blossoming, progressing, planting
Reprint 2026-27
Environment
II Choose the most suitable taste words given in the box below and write against the food items that follow.
sweet sour tangy bitter spicy salty bland (tasteless)
1. tamarind
2. jaggery
3. neem leaves
4. paneer (cottage cheese)
5. lemon
6. pickle
7. a dish of vegetables
Now, use any five taste words and make sentences of your own.
III Choose the correct antonyms for the textual words given below from the box. There are two extra words that you will not need.
growing ordinary unprotected cheerful hard wide fasting shaky fussing coldness
1. tender 5. feasting
2. sturdy 6. grumpy
3. narrow 7. sheltered
4. warmth 8. special
IV Read the following lines from the text and underline all the verbs and identify the form of tense.
1. Rakesh was on his way home from school when he bought the cherries.
2. Rakesh was looking for Grandfather without finding him in any of his favourite places around the house.
3. Rakesh and Grandfather gazed at the tree as though it had performed a miracle.
The forms of tenses in the given statements are Simple Past Tense (1 and 3), Past Progressive Tense (2), and Past Perfect Tense (3).
Reprint 2026-27
Now, fill in the blanks with the correct form of Simple Past, Past
Progressive, or Past Perfect Tenses of the verbs given in brackets.
One example has been done for you.
(i) I was sitting (sit) with my grandparents in the garden, sharing the wonderful memories from my childhood. As we (ii) ______________ (talk),
I (iii) ______________ (realise) how much wisdom they (iv) ______________ (impart) to me over the years. While
I (v) ______________ (listen) to their stories for hours together, I (vi) ______________ (remember) the times we (vii) ______________ (spend) together planting flowers and learning about life. By the time I left, the sun (viii) ______________ (set), and I (ix) ______________ (feel) a deep sense of gratitude for the bond we (x) ______________ (nurture) through love, care, and countless memories.
V Study the punctuation marks
