Electric Charges and Fields
The electric field vector E1B at B due to the positive charge q1 points towards the left and has a magnitude
9 2 –2 8 (9 10 Nm C ) (10 C)
(0.05 m)
= = 3.6 × 104 N C–1
The electric field vector E2B at B due to the negative charge q2 points towards the right and has a magnitude
9 2 –2 8 (9 10 Nm C ) (10 C)
(0.15 m)
= = 4 × 103 N C–1
The magnitude of the total electric field at B is
EB = E1B – E2B = 3.2 × 104 N C–1
EB is directed towards the left.
The magnitude of each electric field vector at point C, due to charge q1 and q2 is
9 2 –2 8 (9 10 Nm C ) (10 C)
(0.10 m)
= = = 9 × 103 N C–1
The directions in which these two vectors point are indicated in
Fig. 1.11. The resultant of these two vectors is
1 2 cos cos
= + C c c E E E = 9 × 103 N C–1
EC points towards the right.
1.8 ELECTRIC FIELD LINES
We have studied electric field in the last section. It is a vector quantity and can be represented as we represent vectors. Let us try to represent E due to a point charge pictorially. Let the point charge be placed at the origin. Draw vectors pointing along the direction of the electric field with their lengths proportional to the strength of the field at each point. Since the magnitude of electric field at a point decreases inversely as the square of the distance of that point from the charge, the vector gets shorter as one goes away from the origin, always pointing radially outward. Figure 1.12 shows such a picture. In this figure, each arrow indicates the electric field, i.e., the force acting on a unit positive charge, placed at the tail of that arrow. Connect the arrows pointing in one direction and the resulting figure represents a field line. We thus get many field lines, all pointing outwards from the point charge. Have we lost the information about the strength or magnitude of the field now, because it was contained in the length of the arrow? No. Now the magnitude of the field is represented by the density of field lines. E is strong near the charge, so the density of field lines is more near the charge and the lines are closer. Away from the charge, the field gets weaker and the density of field lines is less, resulting in well-separated lines.
Another person may draw more lines. But the number of lines is not important. In fact, an infinite number of lines can be drawn in any region.
FIGURE 1.12 Field of a point charge.
Reprint 2026-27
It is the relative density of lines in different regions which is important.
We draw the figure on the plane of paper, i.e., in two- dimensions but we live in three-dimensions. So if one wishes to estimate the density of field lines, one has to consider the number of lines per unit cross-sectional area, perpendicular to the lines. Since the electric field decreases as the square of the distance from a point charge and the area enclosing the charge increases as the square of the distance, the number of field lines crossing the enclosing area remains constant, whatever may be the distance of the area from the charge.
We started by saying that the field lines carry information about the direction of electric field at different points in space.
Having drawn a certain set of field lines, the relative density (i.e., closeness) of the field lines at different points indicates the relative strength of electric field at those points. The field lines crowd where the field is strong and are spaced apart where it is weak. Figure 1.13 shows a set of field lines. We can imagine two equal and small elements of area placed at points R and
S normal to the field lines there. The number of field lines in our picture cutting the area elements is proportional to the magnitude of field at these points. The picture shows that the field at R is stronger than at S.
To understand the dependence of the field lines on the area, or rather the solid angle subtended by an area element, let us try to relate the area with the solid angle, a generalisation of angle to three dimensions.
Recall how a (plane) angle is defined in two-dimensions. Let a small transverse line element Dl be placed at a distance r from a point O. Then the angle subtended by Dl at O can be approximated as D q = Dl/r.
Likewise, in three-dimensions the solid angle* subtended by a small perpendicular plane area DS, at a distance r, can be written as
DW = DS/r2. We know that in a given solid angle the number of radial field lines is the same. In Fig. 1.13, for two points P1 and P2 at distances r1 and r2 from the charge, the element of area subtending the solid angle
1 r DW at P1 and an element of area 2
2 r DW at P2, respectively. The number of lines (say n) cutting these area elements are the same. The number of field lines, cutting unit area element is therefore n/( 2
1 r DW) at
P1 and n/( 2
2 r DW) at P2 , respectively. Since n and DW are common, the strength of the field clearly has a 1/r 2 dependence.
The picture of field lines was invented by Faraday to develop an intuitive non-mathematical way of visualising electric fields around charged configurations. Faraday called them lines of force. This term is somewhat misleading, especially in case of magnetic fields. The more appropriate term is field lines (electric or magnetic) that we have adopted in this book.
Electric field lines are thus a way of pictorially mapping the electric field around a configuration of charges. An electric field line is, in general,
FIGURE 1.13 Dependence of electric field strength on the distance and its relation to the number of field lines.
* Solid angle is a measure of a cone. Consider the intersection of the given cone with a sphere of radius R. The solid angle DW of the cone is defined to be equal to DS/R 2, where DS is the area on the sphere cut out by the cone.
Reprint 2026-27
Electric Charges and Fields a curve drawn in such a way that the tangent to it at each point is in the direction of the net field at that point. An arrow on the curve is obviously necessary to specify the direction of electric field from the two possible directions indicated by a tangent to the curve. A field line is a space curve, i.e., a curve in three dimensions.
Figure 1.14 shows the field lines around some simple charge configurations. As mentioned earlier, the field lines are in 3-dimensional space, though the figure shows them only in a plane. The field lines of a single positive charge are radially outward while those of a single negative charge are radially inward. The field lines around a system of two positive charges (q, q) give a vivid pictorial description of their mutual repulsion, while those around the configuration of two equal and opposite charges (q, –q), a dipole, show clearly the mutual attraction between the charges. The field lines follow some important general properties:
(i) Field lines start from positive charges and end at negative charges. If there is a single charge, they may start or end at infinity.
(ii) In a charge-free region, electric field lines can be taken to be continuous curves without any breaks.
(iii) Two field lines can never cross each other. (If they did, the field at the point of intersection will not have a unique direction, which is absurd.)
(iv) Electrostatic field lines do not form any closed loops.
This follows from the conservative nature of electric field (Chapter 2).
1.9 ELECTRIC FLUX
Consider flow of a liquid with velocity v, through a small flat surface dS, in a direction normal to the surface. The rate of flow of liquid is given by the volume crossing the area per unit time v dS and represents the flux of liquid flowing across the plane. If the normal to the surface is not parallel to the direction of flow of liquid, i.e., to v, but makes an angle q with it, the projected area in a plane perpendicular to v is δ dS cos q. Therefore, the flux going out of the surface dS is v. ˆn dS. For the case of the electric field, we define an analogous quantity and call it electric flux. We should, however, note that there is no flow of a physically observable quantity unlike the case of liquid flow.
In the picture of electric field lines described above, we saw that the number of field lines crossing a unit area, placed normal to the field at a point is a measure of the strength of electric field at that point. This means that if
FIGURE 1.14 Field lines due to some simple charge configurations.
Reprint 2026-27 we place a small planar element of area DS normal to E at a point, the number of field lines crossing it is proportional* to E DS. Now suppose we tilt the area element by angle
Clearly, the number of field lines crossing the area element will be smaller. The projection of the area element normal to E is DS cos q. Thus, the number of field lines crossing DS is proportional to E DS cos q = 90°, field lines will be parallel to DS and will not cross it at all (Fig. 1.15).
The orientation of area element and not merely its magnitude is important in many contexts. For example, in a stream, the amount of water flowing through a ring will naturally depend on how you hold the ring. If you hold it normal to the flow, maximum water will flow through it than if you hold it with some other orientation. This shows that an area element should be treated as a vector. It has a magnitude and also a direction. How to specify the direction of a planar area? Clearly, the normal to the plane specifies the orientation of the plane. Thus the direction of a planar area vector is along its normal.
How to associate a vector to the area of a curved surface? We imagine dividing the surface into a large number of very small area elements.
Each small area element may be treated as planar and a vector associated with it, as explained before.
Notice one ambiguity here. The direction of an area element is along its normal. But a normal can point in two directions. Which direction do we choose as the direction of the vector associated with the area element?
This problem is resolved by some convention appropriate to the given context. For the case of a closed surface, this convention is very simple.
The vector associated with every area element of a closed surface is taken to be in the direction of the outward normal. This is the convention used in Fig. 1.16. Thus, the area element vector DS at a point on a closed surface equals DS ˆn where DS is the magnitude of the area element and
ˆn is a unit vector in the direction of outward normal at that point.
We now come to the definition of electric flux. Electric flux D f through an area element DS is defined by f = E.DS = E DS cos q (1.11)
which, as seen before, is proportional to the number of field lines cutting the area element. The angle q here is the angle between E and DS. For a closed surface, with the convention stated already, q is the angle between
E and the outward normal to the area element. Notice we could look at the expression E DS cos q in two ways: E (DS cos q ) i.e., E times the
FIGURE 1.15 Dependence of flux on the inclination q between E and ˆn .
FIGURE 1.16
Convention for defining normal
ˆn and DS. * It will not be proper to say that the number of field lines is equal to EDS. The number of field lines is after all, a matter of how many field lines we choose to draw. What is physically significant is the relative number of field lines crossing a given area at different points.
Reprint 2026-27
Electric Charges and Fields projection of area normal to E, or E^ DS, i.e., component of E along the normal to the area element times the magnitude of the area element. The unit of electric flux is N C–1 m2.
The basic definition of electric flux given by Eq. (1.11) can be used, in principle, to calculate the total flux through any given surface. All we have to do is to divide the surface into small area elements, calculate the flux at each element and add them up. Thus, the total flux f through a surface S is f ~ S E.DS (1.12)
The approximation sign is put because the electric field E is taken to be constant over the small area element. This is mathematically exact only when you take the limit DS ® 0 and the sum in Eq. (1.12) is written as an integral.
1.10 ELECTRIC DIPOLE
An electric dipole is a pair of equal and opposite point charges q and –q, separated by a distance 2a. The line connecting the two charges defines a direction in space. By convention, the direction from –q to q is said to be the direction of the dipole. The mid-point of locations of –q and q is called the centre of the dipole.
The total charge of the electric dipole is obviously zero. This does not mean that the field of the electric dipole is zero. Since the charge q and
–q are separated by some distance, the electric fields due to them, when added, do not exactly cancel out. However, at distances much larger than the separation of the two charges forming a dipole (r >> 2a), the fields due to q and –q nearly cancel out. The electric field due to a dipole therefore falls off, at large distance, faster than like 1/r 2 (the dependence on r of the field due to a single charge q). These qualitative ideas are borne out by the explicit calculation as follows:
1.10.1 The field of an electric dipole
The electric field of the pair of charges (–q and q) at any point in space can be found out from Coulomb’s law and the superposition principle.
The results are simple for the following two cases: (i) when the point is on the dipole axis, and (ii) when it is in the equatorial plane of the dipole, i.e., on a plane perpendicular to the dipole axis through its centre. The electric field at any general point P is obtained by adding the electric fields E–q due to the charge –q and E+q due to the charge q, by the parallelogram law of vectors.
(i) For points on the axis
Let the point P be at distance r from the centre of the dipole on the side of the charge q, as shown in Fig. 1.17(a). Then
E p − = − +
ε ( ) ˆ [1.13(a)] where ˆp is the unit vector along the dipole axis (from –q to q). Also
E p + = −
ε ( ) ˆ [1.13(b)]
Reprint 2026-27
