bodies are charged through friction, there is a transfer of electric charge from one body to another, but no cr eation or destruction of charge.
5. Coulomb’s Law: The mutual electrostatic force between two point charges q1 and q2 is proportional to the product q1q2 and inversely proportional to the square of the distance r21 separating them.
Mathematically,
F21 = force on q2 due to 1 2 k (q q )
where 21
ˆr is a unit vector in the direction from q1 to q2 and k = 0 is the constant of proportionality.
In SI units, the unit of charge is coulomb. The experimental value of the constant e0 = 8.854 × 10–12 C2 N–1 m–2
The approximate value of k is k = 9 × 109 N m2 C–2
6. The ratio of electric force and gravitational force between a proton and an electron is
G m m ≅ ×
7. Superposition Principle: The principle is based on the property that the forces with which two charges attract or repel each other are not affected by the presence of a third (or more) additional charge(s). For an assembly of charges q1, q2, q3, ..., the force on any charge, say q1, is the vector sum of the force on q1 due to q2, the force on q1 due to q3, and so on. For each pair, the force is given by the Coulomb’s law for two charges stated earlier.
8. The electric field E at a point due to a charge configuration is the force on a small positive test charge q placed at the point divided by the magnitude of the charge. Electric field due to a point charge q has a magnitude |q|/4p e0r2; it is radially outwards from q, if q is positive, and radially inwards if q is negative. Like Coulomb force, electric field also satisfies superposition principle.
9. An electric field line is a curve drawn in such a way that the tangent at each point on the curve gives the direction of electric field at that point. The relative closeness of field lines indicates the relative strength of electric field at different points; they crowd near each other in regions of strong electric field and are far apart where the electric field is weak. In regions of constant electric field, the field lines are uniformly spaced parallel straight lines.
10. Some of the important properties of field lines are: (i) Field lines are continuous curves without any breaks. (ii) Two field lines cannot cross each other. (iii) Electrostatic field lines start at positive charges and end at negative charges —they cannot form closed loops.
11. An electric dipole is a pair of equal and opposite charges q and –q separated by some distance 2a. Its dipole moment vector p has magnitude 2qa and is in the direction of the dipole axis from –q to q.
Reprint 2026-27
Electric Charges and Fields
12. Field of an electric dipole in its equatorial plane (i.e., the plane perpendicular to its axis and passing through its centre) at a distance r from the centre:
2 2 3 / 2
4 ( ) o a r
Dipole electric field on the axis at a distance r from the centre:
4 for r a
The 1/r3 dependence of dipole electric fields should be noted in contrast to the 1/r 2 dependence of electric field due to a point charge.
13. In a uniform electric field E, a dipole experiences a torque τ given by
τ = p × E but experiences no net force.
14. The flux D f of electric field E through a small area element DS is given by f = E.DS
The vector area element DS is
DS = DS ˆn where DS is the magnitude of the area element and ˆn is normal to the area element, which can be considered planar for sufficiently small DS.
For an area element of a closed surface, ˆn is taken to be the direction of outward normal, by convention.
15. Gauss’s law: The flux of electric field through any closed surface S is e0 times the total charge enclosed by S. The law is especially useful in determining electric field E, when the source distribution has simple symmetry:
(i) Thin infinitely long straight wire of uniform linear charge density where r is the perpendicular distance of the point from the wire and
ˆn is the radial unit vector in the plane normal to the wire passing through the point.
(ii) Infinite thin plane sheet of uniform surface charge density where ˆn is a unit vector normal to the plane, outward on either side.
Reprint 2026-27 (iii) Thin spherical shell of uniform surface charge density s
E = 0 (r < R )
where r is the distance of the point from the centre of the shell and R the radius of the shell. q is the total charge of the shell: q = 4
The electric field outside the shell is as though the total charge is concentrated at the centre. The same result is true for a solid sphere of uniform volume charge density. The field is zero at all points inside the shell.
Physical quantity Symbol Dimensions Unit Remarks
Vector area element D S [L2] m2 DS = DS ˆn
Electric field E [MLT–3A–1] V m–1
Electric flux f [ML3 T–3A–1] V m D f = E.DS
Dipole moment p [LTA] C m Vector directed from negative to positive charge
Charge density:
l [L–1 TA] C m–1 Charge/length s [L–2 TA] C m–2 Charge/area r [L–3 TA] C m–3 Charge/volume
POINTS TO PONDER
1. You might wonder why the protons, all carrying positive charges, are compactly residing inside the nucleus. Why do they not fly away?
You will learn that there is a third kind of a fundamental force, called the strong force which holds them together. The range of distance where this force is effective is, however, very small ~10-14 m. This is precisely the size of the nucleus. Also the electrons are not allowed to sit on top of the protons, i.e. inside the nucleus, due to the laws of quantum mechanics. This gives the atoms their structure as they exist in nature.
2. Coulomb force and gravitational force follow the same inverse-square law. But gravitational force has only one sign (always attractive), while
Reprint 2026-27
Electric Charges and Fields
Coulomb force can be of both signs (attractive and repulsive), allowing possibility of cancellation of electric forces. This is how gravity, despite being a much weaker force, can be a dominating and more pervasive force in nature.
3. The constant of proportionality k in Coulomb’s law is a matter of choice if the unit of charge is to be defined using Coulomb’s law. In SI units, however, what is defined is the unit of current (A) via its magnetic effect (Ampere’s law) and the unit of charge (coulomb) is simply defined by (1C = 1 A s). In this case, the value of k is no longer arbitrary; it is approximately 9 × 109 N m2 C–2.
4. The rather large value of k, i.e., the large size of the unit of charge (1C) from the point of view of electric effects arises because (as mentioned in point 3 already) the unit of charge is defined in terms of magnetic forces (forces on current–carrying wires) which are generally much weaker than the electric forces. Thus while 1 ampere is a unit of reasonable size for magnetic effects, 1 C = 1 A s, is too big a unit for electric effects.
5. The additive property of charge is not an ‘obvious’ property. It is related to the fact that electric charge has no direction associated with it;
charge is a scalar.
6. Charge is not only a scalar (or invariant) under rotation; it is also invariant for frames of reference in relative motion. This is not always true for every scalar. For example, kinetic energy is a scalar under rotation, but is not invariant for frames of reference in relative
7. Conservation of total charge of an isolated system is a property independent of the scalar nature of charge noted in point 6.
Conservation refers to invariance in time in a given frame of reference.
A quantity may be scalar but not conserved (like kinetic energy in an inelastic collision). On the other hand, one can have conserved vector quantity (e.g., angular momentum of an isolated system).
8. Quantisation of electric charge is a basic (unexplained) law of nature;
interestingly, there is no analogous law on quantisation of mass.
9. Superposition principle should not be regarded as ‘obvious’, or equated with the law of addition of vectors. It says two things:
force on one charge due to another charge is unaffected by the presence of other charges, and there are no additional three-body, four -body, etc., forces which arise only when there are more than two charges.
10. The electric field due to a discrete charge configuration is not defined at the locations of the discrete charges. For continuous volume charge distribution, it is defined at any point in the distribution.
For a surface charge distribution, electric field is discontinuous across the surface.
11. The electric field due to a charge configuration with total charge zero is not zero; but for distances large compared to the size of the configuration, its field falls off faster than 1/r 2, typical of field due to a single charge. An electric dipole is the simplest example of this fact.
Reprint 2026-27
EXERCISES
1.1 What is the force between two small charged spheres having charges of 2 × 10–7C and 3 × 10–7C placed 30 cm apart in air?
1.2 The electrostatic force on a small sphere of charge 0.4 mC due to another small sphere of charge – 0.8 mC in air is 0.2 N. (a) What is the distance between the two spheres? (b) What is the force on the second sphere due to the first?
1.3 Check that the ratio ke2/G memp is dimensionless. Look up a Table of Physical Constants and determine the value of this ratio. What does the ratio signify?
1.4 (a) Explain the meaning of the statement ‘electric charge of a body is quantised’.
(b) Why can one ignore quantisation of electric charge when dealing with macroscopic i.e., large scale charges?
1.5 When a glass rod is rubbed with a silk cloth, charges appear on both. A similar phenomenon is observed with many other pairs of bodies. Explain how this observation is consistent with the law of conservation of charge.
1.6 Four point charges qA = 2 mC, qB = –5 mC, qC = 2 mC, and qD = –5 located at the corners of a square ABCD of side 10 cm. What is the force on a charge of 1 mC placed at the centre of the square?
1.7 (a) An electrostatic field line is a continuous curve. That is, a field line cannot have sudden breaks. Why not?
(b) Explain why two field lines never cross each other at any point?
1.8 Two point charges qA = 3 mC and qB = –3 mC are located 20 cm apart in vacuum.
(a) What is the electric field at the midpoint O of the line AB joining the two charges?
(b) If a negative test charge of magnitude 1.5 × 10–9 C is placed at this point, what is the force experienced by the test charge?
1.9 A system has two charges qA = 2.5 × 10–7 C and qB = –2.5 × 10–7 C located at points A: (0, 0, –15 cm) and B: (0,0, +15 cm), respectively.
What are the total charge and electric dipole moment of the system?
1.10 An electric dipole with dipole moment 4 × 10–9 C m is aligned at 30° with the direction of a uniform electric field of magnitude 5 × 104 NC–1.
Calculate the magnitude of the torque acting on the dipole.
1.11 A polythene piece rubbed with wool is found to have a negative charge of 3 × 10–7 C.
(a) Estimate the number of electrons transferred (from which to (b) Is there a transfer of mass from wool to polythene?
1.12 (a) Two insulated charged copper spheres A and B have their centres separated by a distance of 50 cm. What is the mutual force of electrostatic repulsion if the charge on each is 6.5 × 10–7 C? The radii of A and B are negligible compared to the distance of separation.
(b) What is the force of repulsion if each sphere is charged double the above amount, and the distance between them is halved?
1.13 Figure 1.30 shows tracks of three charged particles in a uniform electrostatic field. Give the signs of the three charges. Which particle has the highest charge to mass ratio?
Reprint 2026-27
Electric Charges and Fields
FIGURE 1.30
1.14 Consider a uniform electric field E = 3 × 103 î N/C. (a) What is the flux of this field through a square of 10 cm on a side whose plane is parallel to the yz plane? (b) What is the flux through the same square if the normal to its plane makes a 60° angle with the x-axis?
1.15 What is the net flux of the uniform electric field of Exercise 1.14 through a cube of side 20 cm oriented so that its faces are parallel to the coordinate planes?
1.16 Careful measurement of the electric field at the surface of a black box indicates that the net outward flux through the surface of the box is 8.0 × 103 Nm2/C. (a) What is the net charge inside the box?
(b) If the net outward flux through the surface of the box were zero, could you conclude that there were no charges inside the box? Why or Why not?
1.17 A point charge +10 mC is a distance 5 cm directly above the centre of a square of side 10 cm, as shown in Fig. 1.31. What is the magnitude of the electric flux through the square? (Hint: Think of the square as one face of a cube with edge 10 cm.)
FIGURE 1.31
1.18 A point charge of 2.0 mC is at the centre of a cubic Gaussian surface 9.0 cm on edge. What is the net electric flux through the surface?
1.19 A point charge causes an electric flux of –1.0 × 103 Nm2/C to pass through a spherical Gaussian surface of 10.0 cm radius centred on the charge. (a) If the radius of the Gaussian surface were doubled, how much flux would pass through the surface? (b) What is the value of the point charge?
1.20 A conducting sphere of radius 10 cm has an unknown charge. If the electric field 20 cm from the centre of the sphere is 1.5 × 103 N/C and points radially inward, what is the net charge on the sphere?
Reprint 2026-27
1.21 A uniformly charged conducting sphere of 2.4 m diameter has a surface charge density of 80.0 mC/m2. (a) Find the charge on the sphere. (b) What is the total electric flux leaving the surface of the
1.22 An infinite line charge produces a field of 9 × 104 N/C at a distance of 2 cm. Calculate the linear charge density.
1.23 Two large, thin metal plates are parallel and close to each other. On their inner faces, the plates have surface charge densities of opposite signs and of magnitude 17.0 × 10–22 C/m2. What is E: (a) in the outer region of the first plate, (b) in the outer region of the second plate, and (c) between the plates?
Reprint 2026-27
2.1 I 2.1 I 2.1 I 2.1 I 2.1 INTRODUCTION NTRODUCTION NTRODUCTION NTRODUCTION NTRODUCTION
In Chapters 5 and 7 (Class XI), the notion of potential energy was introduced. When an external force does work in taking a body from a point to another against a force like spring force or gravitational force, that work gets stored as potential energy of the body. When the external force is removed, the body moves, gaining kinetic energy and losing an equal amount of potential energy. The sum of kinetic and potential energies is thus conserved. Forces of this kind are called conservative forces. Spring force and gravitational force are examples of conservative forces.
Coulomb force between two (stationary) charges is also a conservative force. This is not surprising, since both have inverse-square dependence on distance and differ mainly in the proportionality constants – the masses in the gravitational law are replaced by charges in Coulomb’s law. Thus, like the potential energy of a mass in a gravitational field, we can define electrostatic potential energy of a charge in an electrostatic field.
Consider an electrostatic field E E E E E due to some charge configuration.
First, for simplicity, consider the field E E E E E due to a charge
Q placed at the origin. Now, imagine that we bring a test charge q from a point R to a point P against the repulsive force on it due to the charge
Q. With reference
Chapter Two
ELECTROSTATIC
POTENTIAL AND
CAPACITANCE
Reprint 2026-27 to Fig. 2.1, this will happen if Q and q are both positive or both negative. For definiteness, let us take Q, q > 0.
Two remarks may be made here. First, we assume that the test charge q is so small that it does not disturb the original configuration, namely the charge Q at the origin (or else, we keep Q fixed at the origin by some unspecified force). Second, in bringing the charge q from
R to P, we apply an external force Fext just enough to counter the repulsive electric force FE (i.e, Fext= –FE).
This means there is no net force on or acceleration of the charge q when it is brought from R to P, i.e., it is brought with infinitesimally slow constant speed. In this situation, work done by the external force is the negative of the work done by the electric force, and gets fully stored in the form of potential energy of the charge q. If the external force is removed on reaching P, the electric force will take the charge away from Q – the stored energy (potential energy) at P is used to provide kinetic energy to the charge q in such a way that the sum of the kinetic and potential energies is conserved.
Thus, work done by external forces in moving a charge q from R to P is
= – (2.1)
This work done is against electrostatic repulsive force and gets stored as potential energy.
At every point in electric field, a particle with charge q possesses a certain electrostatic potential energy, this work done increases its potential energy by an amount equal to potential energy difference between points
R and P.
Thus, potential energy difference
P R RP U U U W ∆ = − = (2.2)
(Note here that this displacement is in an opposite sense to the electric force and hence work done by electric field is negative, i.e., –WRP .)
Therefore, we can define electric potential energy difference between two points as the work required to be done by an external force in moving (without accelerating ) charge q from one point to another for electric field of any arbitrary charge configuration.
Two important comments may be made at this stage:
(i) The right side of Eq. (2.2) depends only on the initial and final positions of the charge. It means that the work done by an electrostatic field in moving a charge from one point to another depends only on the initial and the final points and is independent of the path taken to go from one point to the other. This is the fundamental characteristic of a conservative force. The concept of the potential energy would not be meaningful if the work d
