Fig. 3.12. They are immersed in an electrolytic solution. Dipped in the solution, the electrodes exchange charges with the electrolyte.
The positive electrode has a potential difference V+ (V+ > 0) between itself and the electrolyte solution immediately adjacent to it marked
A in the figure. Similarly, the negative electrode develops a negative potential – (V– ) (V– ≥ 0) relative to the electrolyte adjacent to it, marked as B in the figure. When there is no current, the electrolyte has the same potential throughout, so that the potential difference between P and N is V+ – (–V–) = V+ + V– . This difference is called the electromotive force (emf) of the cell and is denoted by e = V++V– > 0 (3.36)
Note that e is, actually, a potential difference and not a force. The name emf, however, is used because of historical reasons, and was given at a time when the phenomenon was not understood properly.
To understand the significance of e, consider a resistor R connected across the cell (Fig. 3.12). A current I flows across R from C to D. As explained before, a steady current is maintained because current flows from N to P through the electrolyte. Clearly, across the electrolyte the same current flows through the electrolyte but from N to P, whereas through R, it flows from P to N.
The electrolyte through which a current flows has a finite resistance r, called the internal resistance. Consider first the situation when R is infinite so that I = V/R = 0, where V is the potential difference between P and N. Now,
V = Potential difference between P and A
+ Potential difference between A and B
+ Potential difference between B and N e (3.37)
Thus, emf e is the potential difference between the positive and negative electrodes in an open circuit, i.e., when no current is flowing through the cell.
If however R is finite, I is not zero. In that case the potential difference between P and N is
V = V++ V– – I r e – I r (3.38)
Note the negative sign in the expression (I r ) for the potential difference between A and B. This is because the current I flows from B to A in the electrolyte.
In practical calculations, internal resistances of cells in the circuit may be neglected when the current I is such that e >> I r. The actual values of the internal resistances of cells vary from cell to cell. The internal resistance of dry cells, however, is much higher than the common electrolytic cells.
We also observe that since V is the potential difference across R, we have from Ohm’s law
V = I R (3.39)
Combining Eqs. (3.38) and (3.39), we get
FIGURE 3.12 (a) Sketch of an electrolyte cell with positive terminal P and negative terminal N. The gap between the electrodes is exaggerated for clarity. A and B are points in the electrolyte typically close to
P and N. (b) the symbol for a cell, + referring to P and
– referring to the N electrode. Electrical connections to the cell are made at P and N.
Reprint 2026-27
