Moving Charges and
Magnetism
Example 4.5 A straight wire carrying a current of 12 A is bent into a semi-circular arc of radius 2.0 cm as shown in Fig. 4.11(a). Consider the magnetic field B at the centre of the arc. (a) What is the magnetic field due to the straight segments? (b) In what way the contribution to B from the semicircle differs from that of a circular loop and in what way does it resemble? (c) Would your answer be different if the wire were bent into a semi-circular arc of the same radius but in the opposite way as shown in Fig. 4.11(b)?
FIGURE 4.11
Solution (a) dl and r for each element of the straight segments are parallel.
Therefore, dl × r = 0. Straight segments do not contribute to (b) For all segments of the semicircular arc, dl × r are all parallel to each other (into the plane of the paper). All such contributions add up in magnitude. Hence direction of B for a semicircular arc is given by the right-hand rule and magnitude is half that of a circular loop. Thus B is 1.9 × 10–4 T normal to the plane of the paper going into it.
(c) Same magnitude of B but opposite in direction to that in (b).
Example 4.6 Consider a tightly wound 100 turn coil of radius 10 cm, carrying a current of 1 A. What is the magnitude of the magnetic field at the centre of the coil?
Solution Since the coil is tightly wound, we may take each circular element to have the same radius R = 10 cm = 0.1 m. The number of turns N = 100. The magnitude of the magnetic field is,
4 10 10 1
μ π × × ×
6 28 10 T . −
4.6 AMPERE’S CIRCUITAL LAW
There is an alternative and appealing way in which the
Biot-Savart law may be expressed. Ampere’s circuital law considers an open surface with a boundary (Fig. 4.12).
The surface has current passing through it. We consider the boundary to be made up of a number of small line elements. Consider one such element of length dl. We take the value of the tangential component of the magnetic field, Bt, at this element and multiply it by the FIGURE 4.12
Reprint 2026-27
