θ ‡ 0, the perpendicular distance between the forces of the couple also approaches zero. This makes the forces collinear and the net force and torque zero. The torques in Eqs. (4.20) and (4.21)
can be expressed as vector product of the magnetic moment of the coil and the magnetic field.
We define the magnetic moment of the current loop as, m = I A (4.22)
where the direction of the area vector A is given by the right-hand thumb rule and is directed into the plane of the paper in Fig. 4.18. Then as the angle between m and B is
θ , Eqs. (4.20) and (4.21)
can be expressed by one expression
This is analogous to the electrostatic case (Electric dipole of dipole moment pe in an electric field E).
τ = p E × e
As is clear from Eq. (4.22), the dimensions of the magnetic moment are [A][L2] and its unit is Am2.
From Eq. (4.23), we see that the torque τττττ vanishes when m is either parallel or antiparallel to the magnetic field B. This indicates a state of equilibrium as there is no torque on the coil (this also applies to any object with a magnetic moment m). When m and B are parallel the equilibrium is a stable one. Any small rotation of the coil produces a torque which brings it back to its original position. When they are antiparallel, the equilibrium is unstable as any rotation produces a torque which increases with the amount of rotation. The presence of this torque is also the reason why a small magnet or any magnetic dipole aligns itself with the external magnetic field.
If the loop has N closely wound turns, the expression for torque, Eq.
(4.23), still holds, with m = N I A (4.24)
Example 4.10 A 100 turn closely wound circular coil of radius 10 cm carries a current of 3.2 A. (a) What is the field at the centre of the coil? (b) What is the magnetic moment of this coil?
The coil is placed in a vertical plane and is free to rotate about a horizontal axis which coincides with its diameter. A uniform magnetic field of 2T in the horizontal direction exists such that initially the axis of the coil is in the direction of the field. The coil rotates through an angle of 90° under the influence of the magnetic field. (c) What are the magnitudes of the torques on the coil in the initial and final position?
(d) What is the angular speed acquired by the coil when it has rotated by 90°? The moment of inertia of the coil is 0.1 kg m2.
FIGURE 4.19 (a) The area vector of the loop
ABCD makes an arbitrary angle the magnetic field. (b) Top view of the loop. The forces F1 and F2 acting on the arms AB and CD are indicated.
Reprint 2026-27
