n [from Eq. (6.15)] (b) The magnetic energy per unit volume is,
= (where V is volume that contains flux)
= (6.18)
We have already obtained the relation for the electrostatic energy stored per unit volume in a parallel plate capacitor (refer to Chapter 2,
Eq. 2.73),
ε = (2.73)
In both the cases energy is proportional to the square of the field strength. Equations (6.18) and (2.73) have been derived for special cases: a solenoid and a parallel plate capacitor, respectively. But they are general and valid for any region of space in which a magnetic field or/and an electric field exist.
FIGURE 6.13 AC Generator
Interactive animation on ac generator:
http://micro.magnet.fsu.edu/electromag/java/generator/ac.html
6.8 AC GENERATOR
The phenomenon of electromagnetic induction has been technologically exploited in many ways.
An exceptionally important application is the generation of alternating currents (ac). The modern ac generator with a typical output capacity of 100 MW is a highly evolved machine.
In this section, we shall describe the basic principles behind this machine. The Yugoslav inventor Nicola Tesla is credited with the development of the machine. As was pointed out in Section 6.3, one method to induce an emf or current in a loop is through a change in the loop’s orientation or a change in its effective area.
As the coil rotates in a magnetic field B, the effective area of the loop (the face perpendicular to the field) is A cos q, where q is the angle between A and B. This method of producing a flux change is the principle of operation of a
Reprint 2026-27
Electromagnetic
Induction simple ac generator. An ac generator converts mechanical energy into electrical energy.
The basic elements of an ac generator are shown in Fig. 6.13. It consists of a coil mounted on a rotor shaft. The axis of rotation of the coil is perpendicular to the direction of the magnetic field. The coil (called armature) is mechanically rotated in the uniform magnetic field by some external means. The rotation of the coil causes the magnetic flux through it to change, so an emf is induced in the coil. The ends of the coil are connected to an external circuit by means of slip rings and brushes.
When the coil is rotated with a constant angular speed w, the angle between the magnetic field vector B and the area vector A of the coil at any instant t is wt (assuming q = 0° at t = 0). As a result, the effective area of the coil exposed to the magnetic field lines changes with time, and from
Eq. (6.1), the flux at any time t is
FB = BA cos q = BA cos
From Faraday’s law, the induced emf for the rotating coil of N turns is then,
– – (cos )
Thus, the instantaneous value of the emf is
ω ω = NBA sin t (6.19)
where NBA w is the maximum value of the emf, which occurs when wt = ±1. If we denote NBA e0, then wt (6.20)
Since the value of the sine fuction varies between +1 and –1, the sign, or polarity of the emf changes with time. Note from Fig. 6.14 that the emf has its extremum value when q = 90° or q = 270°, as the change of flux is greatest at these points.
The direction of the current changes periodically and therefore the current is called alternating current (ac). Since n, Eq (6.20) can be written as e0sin 2p n t (6.21)
n is the frequency of revolution of the generator’s coil.
Note that Eq. (6.20) and (6.21) give the instantaneous value of the emf e varies between + e0 and – e0 periodically. We shall learn how to determine the time-averaged value for the alternating voltage and current in the next chapter.
In commercial generators, the mechanical energy required for rotation of the armature is provided by water falling from a height, for example, from dams. These are called hydro-electric generators.
Alternatively, water is heated to produce steam using coal or other sources. The steam at high pressure produces the rotation of the armature. These are called thermal generators. Instead of coal, if a nuclear fuel is used, we get nuclear power generators. Modern day generators produce electric power as high as 500 MW, i.e., one can light
Reprint 2026-27
Example 6.10 Kamla peddles a stationary bicycle. The pedals of the bicycle are attached to a 100 turn coil of area 0.10 m2. The coil rotates at half a revolution per second and it is placed in a uniform magnetic field of 0.01 T perpendicular to the axis of rotation of the coil. What is the maximum voltage generated in the coil?
Solution Here n = 0.5 Hz; N =100, A = 0.1 m2 and B = 0.01 T. Employing
Eq. (6.19)
e0 = NBA (2 p
= 100 × 0.01 × 0.1 × 2 × 3.14 × 0.5
= 0.314 V
The maximum voltage is 0.314 V.
We urge you to explore such alternative possibilities for power generation.
FIGURE 6.14 An alternating emf is generated by a loop of wire rotating in a magnetic field.
up 5 million 100 W bulbs! In most generators, the coils are held stationary and it is the electromagnets which are rotated. The frequency of rotation is 50 Hz in India. In certain countries such as USA, it is
Reprint 2026-27
Electromagnetic
Induction
1. The magnetic flux through a surface of area A placed in a uniform magnetic field B is defined as,
FB = B.A = BA cos q is the angle between B and A.
2. Faraday’s laws of induction imply that the emf induced in a coil of N turns is directly related to the rate of change of flux through it,
FB is the flux linked with one turn of the coil. If the circuit is closed, a current I = e/R is set up in it, where R is the resistance of the circuit.
3. Lenz’s law states that the polarity of the induced emf is such that it tends to produce a current which opposes the change in magnetic flux that produces it. The negative sign in the expression for Faraday’s law indicates this fact.
4. When a metal rod of length l is placed normal to a uniform magnetic field B and moved with a velocity v perpendicular to the field, the induced emf (called motional emf ) across its ends is e = Bl v
5. Inductance is the ratio of the flux-linkage to current. It is equal to N
6. A changing current in a coil (coil 2) can induce an emf in a nearby coil (coil 1). This relation is given by,
The quantity M12 is called mutual inductance of coil 1 with respect to coil 2. One can similarly define M21. There exists a general equality,
M12 = M21
7. When a current in a coil changes, it induces a back emf in the same coil. The self-induced emf is given by,
L is the self-inductance of the coil. It is a measure of the inertia of the coil against the change of current through it.
8. The self-inductance of a long solenoid, the core of which consists of a magnetic material of relative permeability mr, is given by m0 n2 A l where A is the area of cross-section of the solenoid, l its length and n the number of turns per unit length.
9. In an ac generator, mechanical energy is converted to electrical energy by virtue of electromagnetic induction. If coil of N turn and area A is rotated at n revolutions per second in a uniform magnetic field B, then the motional emf produced is e = NBA ( 2p n) sin (2p where we have assumed that at time t = 0 s, the coil is perpendicular to the field.
Reprint 2026-27
POINTS TO PONDER
1. Electricity and magnetism are intimately related. In the early part of the nineteenth century, the experiments of Oersted, Ampere and others established that moving charges (currents) produce a magnetic field.
Somewhat later, around 1830, the experiments of Faraday and Henry demonstrated that a moving magnet can induce electric current.
2. In a closed circuit, electric currents are induced so as to oppose the changing magnetic flux. It is as per the law of conservation of energy.
However, in case of an open circuit, an emf is induced across its ends.
How is it related to the flux change?
3. The motional emf discussed in Section 6.5 can be argued independently from Faraday’s law using the Lorentz force on moving charges. However, even if the charges are stationary [and the q (v × B) term of the Lorentz force is not operative], an emf is nevertheless induced in the presence of a time-varying magnetic field. Thus, moving charges in static field and static charges in a time-varying field seem to be symmetric situation for Faraday’s law. This gives a tantalising hint on the relevance of the principle of relativity for Faraday’s law.
EXERCISES
6.1 Predict the direction of induced current in the situations described by the following Figs. 6.15(a) to (f ).
Quantity Symbol Units Dimensions Equations
Magnetic Flux
FB Wb (weber) [M L2 T –2 A–1]
FB = B A i e V (volt) [M L2 T –3 A–1] e = B d( )/ d N t
Mutual Inductance M H (henry) [M L2 T –2 A–2] e1 ( ) 12 2 d /d M I t = −
Self Inductance L H (henry) [M L2 T –2 A–2] ( ) d / d L I t
Reprint 2026-27
