6 Chemistry
Every solid does not dissolve in a given liquid. While sodium chloride and sugar dissolve readily in water, naphthalene and anthracene do not. On the other hand, naphthalene and anthracene dissolve readily in benzene but sodium chloride and sugar do not. It is observed that polar solutes dissolve in polar solvents and non polar solutes in non- polar solvents. In general, a solute dissolves in a solvent if the intermolecular interactions are similar in the two or we may say like dissolves like.
When a solid solute is added to the solvent, some solute dissolves and its concentration increases in solution. This process is known as dissolution. Some solute particles in solution collide with the solid solute particles and get separated out of solution. This process is known as crystallisation. A stage is reached when the two processes occur at the same rate. Under such conditions, number of solute particles going into solution will be equal to the solute particles separating out and a state of dynamic equilibrium is reached.
Solute + Solvent ⇌ Solution (1.10)
At this stage the concentration of solute in solution will remain constant under the given conditions, i.e., temperature and pressure.
Similar process is followed when gases are dissolved in liquid solvents.
Such a solution in which no more solute can be dissolved at the same temperature and pressure is called a saturated solution. An unsaturated solution is one in which more solute can be dissolved at the same temperature. The solution which is in dynamic equilibrium with undissolved solute is the saturated solution and contains the maximum amount of solute dissolved in a given amount of solvent.
Thus, the concentration of solute in such a solution is its solubility.
Earlier we have observed that solubility of one substance into another depends on the nature of the substances. In addition to these variables, two other parameters, i.e., temperature and pressure also control this phenomenon.
Effect of temperature
The solubility of a solid in a liquid is significantly affected by temperature changes. Consider the equilibrium represented by equation 1.10. This, being dynamic equilibrium, must follow Le Chateliers Principle. In general, if in a nearly saturated solution, the dissolution process is endothermic (Dsol H > 0), the solubility should increase with rise in temperature and if it is exothermic (Dsol H < 0) the solubility should decrease. These trends are also observed experimentally.
Effect of pressure
Pressure does not have any significant effect on solubility of solids in liquids. It is so because solids and liquids are highly incompressible and practically remain unaffected by changes in pressure.
Many gases dissolve in water. Oxygen dissolves only to a small extent in water. It is this dissolved oxygen which sustains all aquatic life. On the other hand, hydrogen chloride gas (HCl) is highly soluble in water.
Solubility of gases in liquids is greatly affected by pressure and
1.3.1 Solubility of a Solid in a
1.3.2 Solubility of a Gas in a
Reprint 2026-27
7 Solutions temperature. The solubility of gases increase with increase of pressure.
For solution of gases in a solvent, consider a system as shown in
Fig. 1.1 (a). The lower part is solution and the upper part is gaseous system at pressure p and temperature T. Assume this system to be in a state of dynamic equilibrium, i.e., under these conditions rate of gaseous particles entering and leaving the solution phase is the same.
Now increase the pressure over the solution phase by compressing the gas to a smaller volume [Fig. 1.1 (b)]. This will increase the number of gaseous particles per unit volume over the solution and also the rate at which the gaseous particles are striking the surface of solution to enter it. The solubility of the gas will increase until a new equilibrium is reached resulting in an increase in the pressure of a gas above the solution and thus its solubility increases.
Henry was the first to give a quantitative relation between pressure and solubility of a gas in a solvent which is known as
Henry’s law. The law states that at a constant temperature, the solubility of a gas in a liquid is directly proportional to the partial pressure of the gas present above the surface of liquid or solution. Dalton, a contemporary of Henry, also concluded independently that the solubility of a gas in a liquid solution is a function of partial pressure of the gas. If we use the mole fraction of a gas in the solution as a measure of its solubility, then it can be said that the mole fraction of gas in the solution is proportional to the partial pressure of the gas over the solution. The most commonly used form of Henry’s law states that “the partial pressure of the gas in vapour phase (p) is proportional to the mole fraction of the gas (x) in the solution” and is expressed as:
p = KH x (1.11)
Here KH is the Henry’s law constant. If we draw a graph between partial pressure of the gas versus mole fraction of the gas in solution, then we should get a plot of the type as shown in Fig. 1.2.
Different gases have different KH values at the same temperature (Table 1.2). This suggests that KH is a function of the nature of the gas.
It is obvious from equation (1.11) that higher the value of KH at a given pressure, the lower is the solubility of the gas in the liquid. It can be seen from Table 1.2 that KH values for both N2 and O2 increase with increase of temperature indicating that the solubility of gases
Fig. 1.1: Effect of pressure on the solubility of a gas. The concentration of dissolved gas is proportional to the pressure on the gas above the solution.
Fig. 1.2: Experimental results for the solubility of HCl gas in cyclohexane at 293 K. The slope of the line is the
Henry’s Law constant, KH.
Reprint 2026-27
8 Chemistry increases with decrease of temperature. It is due to this reason that aquatic species are more comfortable in cold waters rather than in warm waters.
Henry’s law finds several applications in industry and explains some biological phenomena. Notable among these are:
· To increase the solubility of CO2 in soft drinks and soda water, the bottle is sealed under high pressure.
· Scuba divers must cope with high concentrations of dissolved gases while breathing air at high pressure underwater. Increased pressure increases the solubility of atmospheric gases in blood. When the divers come towards surface, the pressure gradually decreases. This releases the dissolved gases and leads to the formation of bubbles of nitrogen in the blood. This blocks capillaries and creates a medical condition known as bends, which are painful and dangerous to life.
If N2 gas is bubbled through water at 293 K, how many millimoles of N2 gas would dissolve in 1 litre of water? Assume that N2 exerts a partial pressure of 0.987 bar. Given that Henry’s law constant for N2 at 293 K is
76.48 kbar.
The solubility of gas is related to the mole fraction in aqueous solution.
The mole fraction of the gas in the solution is calculated by applying
Henry’s law. Thus:
x (Nitrogen) = H (nitrogen) p
K = 0.987bar
76,480 bar = 1.29 × 10–5
As 1 litre of water contains 55.5 mol of it, therefore if n represents number of moles of N2 in solution, x (Nitrogen) = mol mol 55.5 mol + n = 55.5 n = 1.29 × 10–5 (n in denominator is neglected as it is < < 55.5)
Thus n = 1.29 × 10–5 × 55.5 mol = 7.16 × 10–4 mol
7.16×10 mol × 1000 mmol
1 mol = 0.716 mmol
Example 1.4 Example 1.4 Example 1.4 Example 1.4 Example 1.4
Solution Solution Solution Solution Solution
Gas Temperature/K KH /kbar Gas Temperature/K KH/kbar
He 293 144.97
H2 293 69.16
N2 293 76.48
N2 303 88.84
O2 293 34.86
O2 303 46.82
Table 1.2: Values of Henry's Law Constant for Some Selected Gases in Water
Argon 298 40.3
CO2 298 1.67
Formaldehyde 298 1.83×10-5
Methane 298 0.413
Vinyl chloride 298 0.611
Reprint 2026-27
9 Solutions
To avoid bends, as well as, the toxic effects of high concentrations of nitrogen in the blood, the tanks used by scuba divers are filled with air diluted with helium (11.7% helium, 56.2% nitrogen and
32.1% oxygen).
· At high altitudes the partial pressure of oxygen is less than that at the ground level. This leads to low concentrations of oxygen in the blood and tissues of people living at high altitudes or climbers. Low blood oxygen causes climbers to become weak and unable to think clearly, symptoms of a condition known as anoxia.
Effect of Temperature
Solubility of gases in liquids decreases with rise in temperature. When dissolved, the gas molecules are present in liquid phase and the process of dissolution can be considered similar to condensation and heat is evolved in this process. We have learnt in the last Section that dissolution process involves dynamic equilibrium and thus must follow Le Chatelier’s Principle. As dissolution is an exothermic process, the solubility should decrease with increase of temperature.
Liquid solutions are formed when solvent is a liquid. The solute can be a gas, a liquid or a solid. Solutions of gases in liquids have already been discussed in Section 1.3.2. In this Section, we shall discuss the solutions of liquids and solids in a liquid. Such solutions may contain one or more volatile components. Generally, the liquid solvent is volatile.
The solute may or may not be volatile. We shall discuss the properties of only binary solutions, that is, the solutions containing two components, namely, the solutions of (i) liquids in liquids and (ii) solids in liquids.
Let us consider a binary solution of two volatile liquids and denote the two components as 1 and 2. When taken in a closed vessel, both the components would evaporate and eventually an equilibrium would be established between vapour phase and the liquid phase. Let the total vapour pressure at this stage be ptotal and p1 and p2 be the partial vapour pressures of the two components 1 and 2 respectively. These partial pressures are related to the mole fractions x1 and x2 of the two components 1 and 2 respectively.
The French chemist, Francois Marte Raoult (1886) gave the quantitative relationship between them. The relationship is known as the Raoult’s law which states that for a solution of volatile liquids,
1 . 4 1 . 4 1 . 4 1 . 4 1 . 4 Vapour Vapour Vapour Vapour Vapour
Pressure of Pressure of Pressure of Pressure of Pressure of
Liquid Liquid Liquid Liquid Liquid
Solutions Solutions Solutions Solutions Solutions
Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions
1.6 H2S, a toxic gas with rotten egg like smell, is used for the qualitative analysis. If the solubility of H2S in water at STP is 0.195 m, calculate Henry’s law constant.
1.7 Henry’s law constant for CO2 in water is 1.67×108 Pa at 298 K. Calculate the quantity of CO2 in 500 mL of soda water when packed under 2.5 atm
CO2 pressure at 298 K.
1.4.1 Vapour
Pressure of
Solutions
Reprint 2026-27
