33 Electrochemistry
As mentioned earlier a galvanic cell is an electrochemical cell that converts the chemical energy of a spontaneous redox reaction into electrical energy. In this device the Gibbs energy of the spontaneous redox reaction is converted into electrical work which may be used for running a motor or other electrical gadgets like heater, fan, geyser, etc.
Daniell cell discussed earlier is one such cell in which the following redox reaction occurs.
Zn(s) + Cu2+(aq) ® Zn2+ (aq) + Cu(s)
This reaction is a combination of two half reactions whose addition gives the overall cell reaction:
(i) Cu2+ + 2e– ® Cu(s) (reduction half reaction) (2.2)
(ii) Zn(s) ® Zn2+ + 2e– (oxidation half reaction) (2.3)
These reactions occur in two different portions of the Daniell cell.
The reduction half reaction occurs on the copper electrode while the oxidation half reaction occurs on the zinc electrode. These two portions of the cell are also called half-cells or redox couples. The copper electrode may be called the reduction half cell and the zinc electrode, the oxidation half-cell.
We can construct innumerable number of galvanic cells on the pattern of Daniell cell by taking combinations of different half-cells. Each half- cell consists of a metallic electrode dipped into an electrolyte. The two half-cells are connected by a metallic wire through a voltmeter and a switch externally. The electrolytes of the two half-cells are connected internally through a salt bridge as shown in Fig. 2.1. Sometimes, both the electrodes dip in the same electrolyte solution and in such cases we do not require a salt bridge.
At each electrode-electrolyte interface there is a tendency of metal ions from the solution to deposit on the metal electrode trying to make it positively charged. At the same time, metal atoms of the electrode have a tendency to go into the solution as ions and leave behind the electrons at the electrode trying to make it negatively charged. At equilibrium, there is a separation of charges and depending on the tendencies of the two opposing reactions, the electrode may be positively or negatively charged with respect to the solution. A potential difference develops between the electrode and the electrolyte which is called electrode potential. When the concentrations of all the species involved in a half-cell is unity then the electrode potential is known as standard electrode potential. According to IUPAC convention, standard reduction potentials are now called standard electrode potentials. In a galvanic cell, the half-cell in which oxidation takes place is called anode and it has a negative potential with respect to the solution. The other half-cell in which reduction takes place is called cathode and it has a positive potential with respect to the solution. Thus, there exists a potential difference between the two electrodes and as soon as the switch is in the on position the electrons flow from negative electrode to positive electrode. The direction of current flow is opposite to that of electron flow.
2.2 Galvanic Cells 2.2 Galvanic Cells 2.2 Galvanic Cells 2.2 Galvanic Cells 2.2 Galvanic Cells
Reprint 2026-27
