thRee DayS to See
Let us do these activities before we read.
I Work in pairs. Recall a visit to a place that you liked. Discuss the details of that place and write about the following:
1. Name of the place
2. The person(s) you went with
3. The things that you could:
• see • listen • smell • taste • touch and feel
II How does this memory make you feel?
III Do you think your visit/experience would be different if you could not see or hear? Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher.
Did you know that our five senses are essential for us to experience and make sense of the world around us?
Reprint 2026-27
L earning TogeTher symmetry:
evenness birch: a slender tree with thin peeling bark quiver: shiver shaggy: hairy
Let us read
I, who cannot see, find hundreds of things to interest me through mere touch. I feel the delicate symmetry of a leaf. I pass my hands lovingly about the smooth skin of a silver birch, or the rough, shaggy bark of a pine. In spring, I touch the branches of trees hopefully in search of a bud, the first sign of awakening Nature after her winter’s sleep. Occasionally, I am very fortunate; I place my hand gently on a small tree and feel the happy quiver of a bird in full song.
At times, my heart cries out with longing to see all these things. If I can get so much pleasure from mere touch, how much more beauty must be revealed by sight. And
I have imagined what I should most like to see if I were given the use of my eyes, say, for just three days.
I should divide the period into three parts. On the first day, I should want to see the people whose kindness and companionship have made my life worth living. I do not know what it is to see into the heart of a friend through that ‘window of the soul’, the eye.
I can only ‘see’ through my fingertips the outline of a face.
I can detect laughter, sorrow and other obvious emotions.
I know my friends from the feel of their faces.
Reprint 2026-27 behold: see panorama: scene glimpse: brief
The next day I should arise with the dawn and see the thrilling miracle by which night is transformed into day. I should behold with awe the magnificent panorama of light with which the sun awakens the sleeping earth. This day I should devote to a hasty glimpse of the world, past and present. I should want to see the pageant of man’s progress, and so I should go to the museums. There my eyes would see the condensed history of the earth—animals and the races of men pictured in their native environment; gigantic carcasses of dinosaurs and mastodons that roamed the earth before man appeared, with his tiny stature and powerful brain, to conquer the animal kingdom.
The following morning, I should again greet the dawn, anxious to discover new delights, new revelations of beauty. Today, this third day, I shall spend in the workaday world, amid the haunts of men going about the business of life. The city becomes my destination.
First, I stand at a busy corner, merely looking at people, trying by sight of them to understand something of their daily lives. I see smiles, and I am happy.
I see serious determination, and
I am proud. I see suffering, and I am compassionate.
pageant: display condensed:
carcasses:
stature:
physique, build haunts: regular meeting places merely: just mastodons: a large animal similar to an elephant, but with fur
Reprint 2026-27
L earning TogeTher
At midnight, permanent night would close in on me again.
Naturally in those three short days I should not have seen all
I wanted to see. Only when darkness had again descended upon me should I realise how much I had left unseen.
I who am blind can give one hint to those who can see: use your eyes as if tomorrow you would be stricken blind. And the same method can be applied to your other senses. Hear the music of voice, the song of a bird, the mighty strains of an orchestra, as if you would be stricken deaf tomorrow. Touch each object as if tomorrow your tactile sense would fail. Smell the perfume of flowers, taste with relish each morsel, as if tomorrow you could never smell and taste again. Make the most of every sense; glory in all the facets of pleasure and beauty, which the world reveals to you through the several means of contact, which Nature provides. But of all the senses,
I am sure that sight must be the most delightful.
heLen KeLLer
Let us discuss
I Work in pairs. Identify the statements that are true from the ones given below. Share your answers with the teacher.
1. The author expresses a deep longing to experience the world through the sense of hearing.
2. The author would like exploring the city only to observe how people are suffering.
3. The author would spend the first day seeing the people whose kind-heartedness and friendship have enriched her life.
4. The author acknowledges that even in three days, she would not be able to see everything.
5. The author feels that everyone can find the greatest joy merely by the sense of touch.
6. The author advises those who can see to appreciate every moment as if they might lose their senses tomorrow.
7. On the third day, the author would like to observe people in their daily lives and understand their experiences.
strains: tunes tactile sense:
sense of touch morsel: a small piece of food facets: aspects
Reprint 2026-27
II Complete the table given below with what Helen Keller wanted to do on the three days if she had sight.
Day 1 Day 2 Day 3 see the people, know her friends from the feel of their faces, … arise with the dawn,
III The author says that you need eyes to be able to ‘see’ the true self of a person. Therefore, she refers to the eye as ‘window of the soul’.
How is the narrator able to understand the feelings of a person?
Let us think and reflect
I Read the extracts given below and answer the questions that follow.
1. I feel the delicate symmetry of a leaf. I pass my hands lovingly about the smooth skin of a silver birch, or the rough, shaggy bark of a pine.
In spring, I touch the branches of trees hopefully in search of a bud, the first sign of awakening Nature after her winter’s sleep. Occasionally, I am very fortunate; I place my hand gently on a small tree and feel the happy quiver of a bird in full song.
(i) What does the ‘delicate symmetry of a leaf’ symbolise?
(ii) List two phrases from the extract that describe the texture of objects in nature.
(iii) Complete the sentence appropriately.
The phrase ‘awakening Nature after her winter’s sleep’ refers to __________________.
(iv) What is the tone of the writer in this extract?
A. nostalgic B. proud
C. admiring D. celebratory
2. The next day I should arise with the dawn and see the thrilling miracle by which night is transformed into day. I should behold with awe the magnificent panorama of light with which the sun awakens the sleeping earth. This day I should devote to a hasty glimpse of the world, past and present. I should want to see the pageant of man’s progress, and so I should go to the museums.
Reprint 2026-27
L earning TogeTher (i) The word ‘thrilling’ has been used with ‘miracle’.
Which of the following words does not match with the word
‘thrilling’?
A. experience B. tale C. knowledge D. adventure (ii) Why does the writer refer to the earth as ‘sleeping earth’?
(iii) Complete the sentence with an appropriate reason.
The writer wishes to dedicate the day to a brief look at the present and past world because __________________.
(iv) Why does the writer use ‘should’ multiple times in the extract?
II Answer the following questions.
1. The sense of touch makes up for the loss of sight and hearing. Explain this statement with reference to the text.
2. Why does the author believe that the sense of sight is the most wonderful?
3. How might the author’s opinion on making the most of our senses guide us to be kinder towards people with special abilities?
4. What is the significance of imagining the loss of a sense, according to the author?
5. How does the author encourage people to approach their everyday sensory experiences?
6. What do the author’s choices for the three days tell us about her values and priorities?
Reprint 2026-27
III Identify the modal verbs in the following sentences. Choose the functions they express from those given in the box below.
possibility necessity polite request ability moral obligation
1. You can learn a lot from this experience.
2. They might arrive late due to traffic.
Modal verbs are auxiliary verbs that express necessity, possibility, permission, or ability. They are used before the main verb to give additional information about the function of the main verb. Common modal verbs include can, could, may, might, shall, should, will, would, must, and ought to.
Let us learn
I Sensory words are descriptive—they describe how we experience the world: how we see, hear, smell, taste or feel something.
Complete the following table with sensory words from the text in Column
2 for the five senses in Column 1. Add new words in Column 3.
Column 1 Column 2 Column 3
What you see panorama
What you hear music
What you smell perfume
What you taste relish
What you feel rough
II Read the following sentences from the text and underline the verbs.
• I should divide the period into three parts.
• On the first day, I should want to see…
• The next day I should arise with the dawn…
• I should behold with awe…
The words you have underlined are a combination of two verbs. In each of these sentences, ‘should’ is the modal verb (suggestion), and the second verb (divide, want, arise, behold) is the main verb.
Reprint 2026-27
3. She must finish her homework before dinner.
4. They ought to apologise for their mistake.
5. He would like to have some lassi, please.
IV Read the situations in Column 1 and functions in Column 2. Fill in the blanks in the sentences in Column 4 with appropriate modal verbs from
Column 3. After filling in the blanks, explain the function of each modal verb you used to your classmates and the teacher.
Column 1 Column 2 Column 3 Column 4
1. You want to leave work permission could, may, must, ought will, would (i) ____________ I leave early today if I finish all my
2. You have an important deadline tomorrow.
obligation (ii) I ____________ finish this report by tomorrow.
3. Your friend is thinking whether to join
Art class.
advice (iii) You ____________ consider all the pros and cons before making a decision.
4. There are dark clouds in the possibility (iv) It ____________ rain later today.
5. Asking someone to pass the salt at the dinner (v) ____________ you pass the salt,
6. Advising someone to apologise for a obligation (vi) You ____________ apologise for the mistake you
7. Deciding where to go for picnic suggestion (vii) We ____________ go to any park nearby for
L earning TogeTher
Reprint 2026-27
Let us listen
You will listen to a conversation between a mother and son. As you listen, select four true statements from 1–7 given below. (Transcript for the teacher on pg. 41)
Statements True or False
Let us speak
Work in pairs. Take turns to speak for a minute on any one of the senses you value the most. Use the given prompts to frame your response before you
• I value my sense of sight/ sound/ touch/ smell / taste the most because...
• One of my favourite experiences is...
• This is so because...
• I appreciate being able to see/ hear/touch/ smell/ taste...
• God forbid, if I were to lose the sense of sight/ sound/ touch/ smell / taste, it would make me feel...
• I would not be able to...
• I thank God that I am able to see/ hear/ touch/ smell / taste.
1. Anuj finds the concept of Braille fascinating and wants to learn more about it.
2. Mother is unsure of the school’s efforts to include students with visual impairment.
3. Anuj initially thinks that Digital India is only about learning how to use computers.
4. Mother believes that screen readers are very effective for persons who are visually impaired.
5. Anuj already knew that persons who are visually impaired can use computers and smartphones.
6. Anuj wants to know about the effectiveness of assistive technologies for persons who are visually impaired.
7. Mother believes a right mindset is the best support for persons who are visually impaired.
______________
Reprint 2026-27
L earning TogeTher
Remember to
• speak clearly and confidently
• glance at your notes for reference rather than reading
• make eye contact
• use gestures if you wish to
• pronounce words clearly and avoid mumbling
• speak at a steady, moderate pace
Let us write
A descriptive paragraph describes a person, place, object or event to create a memorable experience for the reader. Write a descriptive paragraph describing a place that you visited recently.
Follow the guidelines given below to draft this paragraph.
1. In the opening line, begin with something interesting to capture the reader’s attention. Introduce the place you visited.
2. In the supporting lines, describe the place using adjectives and specific details that appealed to your five senses—sight, sound, smell, taste, and touch. You may include alliterations, similes, and personifications to hold the reader’s attention.
3. In the concluding lines, summarise the description to provide a final impression. Mention what was the most important thing about that place which others should also experience.
Let us explore
I Do you know how persons with visual challenges are able to read and write? They read through touch with the help of Braille, a code of raised dots that represents the letters of the alphabet. This tactile code was developed over a period of nine years by Louis
Braille, who became blind at a very young age due to an accident.
Louis Braille (Courtesy FMT)
Reprint 2026-27
Study the code given below and write your name using it. You may use bindis or grains of daal to make the dots that you can touch and feel.
A B C D E F G H I J K L M
N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
II Have you heard about the International Day of Persons with Disabilities?
Find out when and how it is observed in India. Write your findings on a sheet and put it up on the class board.
III Do you want to know about sign language? Go to the link given below to learn about the Indian sign language.
https://ncert.nic.in/pdf/accessibility/ISL_200word_v15.pdf
Reprint 2026-27 the Day the RiveR Spoke
Let us listen (refer to page 12)
I Read the words given in the box below. You will listen to five people speak about school life. As you listen, circle the words that are used by the speakers. There are two words you do not need.
SpeakeR (i): (Father) Should girls attend school? Yes, they should. I do my best to ensure that both my son and daughter get equal opportunities. I look forward to their successful careers and rewarding lives. I feel education gives freedom to make choices in life. Whether my daughter wants to work in an organisation or be a homemaker, it should be her choice and the same applies to my son.
SpeakeR (ii): (Grandmother) I went to school but many girls at that time could not attend school because some elders in the village felt that girls should help in the house and take care of their little brothers and sisters. I am happy that the situation has changed
SpeakeR (iii): (Teacher) The school prepares students for meaningful and useful participation in the world of work by learning hands-on abilities and skills, developing equal respect for head-hands-heart, valuing the dignity of labour, and understanding vocational choices for the future.
SpeakeR (iv): (Student) I like to go to school. I feel that by coming to school and reading the books, I learn about things from all over the world. I also have friends with whom I can share my feelings.
TRANSCRIPTS
L earning TogeTher
Reprint 2026-27
SpeakeR (v) : (Principal) Everyone should attend school. You must’ve noticed that the girls are doing very well.
However, as the Head of an institution, I know that all students can work hard. My message to students is that they should attend school regularly and take part in every school activity without bothering whether it is for girls or boys. The idea is to focus on learning.
II You will once again listen to the five speakers. As you listen, match each statement 1–7 to each speaker (i)–(v). There are two statements that you do not need.
tRy again
Let us listen (refer to page 24)
1. You will listen to a story about an ant. Read the questions given below and before you listen, guess the answers to these questions.
Hello everyone,
I’m sure you have enjoyed learning about King Bruce and the spider. Let me share another story with you.
In a thick green forest, there lived a little ant. She was known for her determination and never-give-up attitude. One sunny day, the ant found a delicious piece of roti that was too big for her to carry alone.
“This crumb is huge, but I must get it back to the anthill. My family will be so happy!” she thought to herself.
She tried to lift the crumb with all her might, but it was too heavy.
She tried pushing it, pulling it and even rolling it, but nothing seemed to work. Exhausted and saddened, she sat down and began to cry.
As the ant sat there, feeling beaten, she noticed a small bird nearby. The bird was trying to build a nest. It picked up twigs and leaves, but every time it tried to place them, the wind would blow them away. However, the bird did not give up. It kept trying, over and over again, until finally, it managed to build a strong
Reprint 2026-27
“If that bird can keep trying and succeed, then I shouldn’t give up either,” she thought, feeling inspired.
Determined once more, the ant gathered all her strength and decided to try again. She called her fellow ants for help. Together, they formed a chain and lifted the crumb with their combined strength. Slowly but surely, they carried the crumb back to the anthill.
“We did it! Thank you, everyone! We showed that with teamwork and never giving up, we can achieve anything!” the ant shouted, excited and grateful.
She and her friends celebrated their success.
We to
