D reams anD Discoveries
M y Brother’s Great InventIon
Let us do these activities before we read.
I Work in pairs and guess the invention.
1. I am a concept invented by ancient Indian mathematicians. I add value to numbers. Without me, calculations in the modern digital world would be impossible. Who am I?
2. I am an ancient Indian practice, now popular globally. I focus on physical and mental well-being. What am I?
II Discuss in groups of four what you think the world today would have been like without inventions and discoveries.
III Fill the grid given below with missing letters to complete the words.
These words display qualities of an inventor.
DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES
Reprint 2026-27
Let us read
“Who put that water bag here?” roared my father from the front doorstep. “Your burglar alarm,” I hissed to my brother
Anand, who was getting ready to disappear from the house.
Ma rushed in to see what the racket was all about and found
Papa standing there, sopping wet and scowling.
“I want to know who is behind this nonsense,” Papa said
“I think it’s supposed to be a burglar alarm,” Ma said, in a soothing voice.
“I don’t care what it’s supposed to be,” Papa said.
“Where’s that boy? I’m sure he rigged this up.”
Anand had vanished by this time and reappeared only after dinner when Papa had cooled down.
Before this story, let me put you in the picture. I am Anita, fourteen years old. My brother Anand, one year younger than me, caused all that hoo-ha with his burglar alarm.
And this is not the first time he’s got on Papa’s nerves or frightened someone half to death in the house. The trouble with him is that he thinks he is a scientist. He loves tinkering with all sorts of electrical gadgets, tools, dynamos, planks of wood, and things like that. And he keeps creating ‘inventions’ that never work out as they are supposed to.
Recently there had been a rush of thefts in the colony and Anand had got it into his head that what was needed was a burglar alarm. So, the minute Papa left for the office and Ma for the market, he started on his latest scheme. As usual I had to be involved, though I’d have preferred to finish my novel. “If you get a shelling, don’t bring me in,” I warned Anand.
“Nothing will go wrong this time. I’ve planned it out carefully. See the blueprint.” racket: a loud and disturbing scowling: having an angry or frowning expression rigged up:
assembled something temporarily tinkering:
experimenting or fiddling dynamos:
electric generator sopping: soaking
Reprint 2026-27 my own doubts about the alarm’s guessing powers, but kept them to myself because when Anand is in one of his inventive moods, nothing stops him.
“You see,” Anand explained smugly, “A thief tries to open the door stealthily. I’ve rigged it up so that the alarm works only when the door is opened gently.”
I was sceptical. “Remember, if Papa asks, I’m not involved,” I warned. “Now clean up this mess before anyone gets home.”
As you already know, my doubts about the alarm were quite justified. Papa, who always opens the door softly, was thoroughly soaked and angry as angry could be. Anyway, for a week after this, Anand did not dare try out anything new.
Then we saw this film ‘Back to the Future’. I don’t know if you have seen it, but it’s all about a time machine. Well, that was stealthily:
quietly or carefully so that one is not seen or heard sceptical:
doubtful smugly: proudly clanging: a loud ringing sound like that of a metal being hit elaborate:
detailed
Anand loves words like blueprint—it makes him feel professional! Anyway, I looked at the elaborate drawing of doors, wires, and bells and asked, “How does this thing work?”
“It’s quite simple. The moment the door opens, this alarm is tripped off and makes a clanging sound. Then this water bag here is loosened and falls on the thief’s head. By then we call the police—simple!”
“But how does the alarm know that a burglar is opening the door?”
“I’ve taken care of that,” Anand said loftily. I had the end of peace and quiet in the house.
My brother decided that he had to make a time machine too. Papa locked up his tool box and hid the key while Ma kept a wary eye on her oven and mixer. Because, as I told you, when Anand is on one of his inventing binges, he takes apart all the gadgets in the house to collect parts. You can’t imagine the noise that
D reams anD Discoveries
Reprint 2026-27 was going on—hammering and sawing and clattering. Anand’s room, next to our room, was transformed into a network of wires, springs, levers, and bulbs. There was an enormous panel which was to be control switchboard. As for Anand, he went around looking like a savage. When Ma didn’t notice, the fellow didn’t even comb his hair.
Anand just wouldn’t let anyone into his room. Finally, after a fortnight of frantic activity, the time machine was ready. “We can try it out tonight,” Anand announced to everyone at home at lunch time.
“I don’t know what you’ve been up to in that room, but you’re not trying out anything new,” Papa said firmly.
“But it’s a time machine! I’ve invented it,” Anand protested.
“When I say NO, I mean NO,” Papa said, glaring.
“Poor boy,” Ma said noticing Anand’s crestfallen look.
“At least let’s take a look at it.”
Papa sighed. “All right, but if the house falls, it’s your fault.”
As it turned out, we could not try out the time machine that day at all. The next day, Papa and Ma were going to Kharagpur, a few hours away from Calcutta (now Kolkata), for a wedding.
Ma was worried about leaving us alone, but we reassured her.
“We’re old enough to look after ourselves, Ma,” I said. “And we can go next door to Sharma Aunty if we need anything.”
“And it’s only one night,” Anand added.
“All right. But promise me you won’t do anything with that time machine till we come back,” Ma said sternly, looking at
Anand. He promised half-heartedly, offended at this lack of respect for his creation. I breathed a sigh of relief.
Let us discuss
I Complete the cause-and-effect table given below.
Causes Effects
1. Anand set up his burglar alarm and rigged it to work when the door was opened softly.
frantic:
hurried and disorganised crestfallen look: sad and disappointed appearance offended: felt upset or hurt
Reprint 2026-27
D reams anD Discoveries
2. Anita was able to avoid any responsibility as Anand faced the consequences alone.
3. We watched the movie ‘Back to the Future’.
4. Papa firmly said ‘NO’ to trying out the time machine.
II Do you think Anand was able to keep his promise regarding the time machine? If yes, why? If no, why not?
They left by the afternoon train and were coming back the following evening. Anand fell asleep immediately, but I stayed up to finish a novel. At about eleven thirty I thought I heard a scratching at the front door. Telling myself it was only my imagination, I went back to the book. A little later there was a rattle and a click. I was really scared, I can tell you, what with a murder story before me and then strange noises in the middle of the night! I shook Anand and whispered, “Listen, there’s someone at the door.”
“Go and open it then,” he muttered groggily.
“You silly! Someone’s trying to get in,” I said.
Anand sat up. “Who? What?”
“I don’t know,” I said. “What shall we do?”
“Let’s holler for help,” he said. Before we could do anything, the door swung open and we found ourselves looking at a ruffianly fellow with a green scarf around his neck.
Anand gasped.
“Hey, it’s Boppa!” I whispered. It was indeed the fellow who had recently begun sweeping out the compounds in our row of houses. So, he was the thief, and no wonder. He knew exactly when the occupants were out, leaving the coast clear.
The fellow gave an evil grin. “One squeak out of you and see what happens,” he said, brandishing his cudgel and backing out of the room. We heard him slide the latch in.
“What do we do now?” I asked in a low voice.
groggily:
sleepily ruffianly:
rough or violent gasped: took a short, deep breath in surprise brandishing:
cudgel: a short, thick stick used as a weapon
Reprint 2026-27 muffled: not a very clear and loud sound clattering:
continuous loud eerie: strange
“Let’s shout anyway,” Anand suggested.
The door opened suddenly again in the middle of our discussion.
“No noise from you! Now, where is your father’s room?”
I was about to direct him upstairs when Anand said quickly,
“The one next to this one.”
“You silly goose!” I said angrily as soon as the man had gone.
“That’s your room. He’ll come back as mad as mad can be.”
“At least it will give us some time to think of something,” Anand said. “He’ll take a while to locate the light switch. Let’s shout.”
All of a sudden there was a crash followed by a loud scream.
More strange noises emerged from the next room—a few muffled thumps, an eerie whine, and a low, humming sound.
“My time machine, he’s started it!” Anand gasped. “I wish we could get out of this room and see what is happening out there.”
There was another howl, much fainter this time, and a great deal of clattering. We shouted for all we were worth. In a few minutes, we heard footsteps running up our drive. Thankfully we recognised Mrs. Sharma’s voice, along with her husband and Dr. Mohan—also a neighbour.
“Anand! Anita! Children, what’s the matter? Where are you?”
Reprint 2026-27
D reams anD Discoveries peering: looking carefully together hastily: quickly
“Here!” we shouted in unison. In a minute the door was unlocked.
“What on earth has been happening here, children?” Sharma
Uncle asked. Both Anand and I fell over ourselves trying to explain. “Where is the fellow now?”
“The last we heard, he was in the time machine,” I explained hastily, seeing everyone looking rather puzzled.
We entered the room cautiously and turned on the lights. The time machine was still humming softly but otherwise there was no other sound from the room.
“Well, where is he?” Dr. Mohan asked, peering behind the door. “Did you imagine this?”
“Oh no,” I protested. “How could both of us have imagined the same thing?”
“Maybe he ran out,” Anand suggested.
“I’m sure we’d have seen him. There’s only one way out of this house and we came the same way as soon as we heard you,”
Sharma Uncle sounded very sure.
“Look!” Anand said, pointing to the floor. “He was wearing that.” Near the panel of switches was the green scarf.
Reprint 2026-27
“Let’s search the house—perhaps he’s still around,” Dr. Mohan said, going upstairs.
Boppa was nowhere to be seen. “Well maybe he did run out and we missed him,” Mrs. Sharma said at last, “I can’t imagine what else could have happened.”
“My time machine! He’s gone through that!” Anand burst out, his eyes shining.
“What an imagination this boy has!” Mr. Sharma said, smiling indulgently. “Now off to bed, both of you. I’ll spend the night here so you needn’t worry about any more intruders now.” indulgently:
intruders:
people who enter a place permission dismantled:
taken apart
Needless to say, Boppa was never seen again. Anand insists that his time machine worked and he disappeared into the past. The machine itself was dismantled because Papa thought it wasn’t safe (maybe he also had a niggling suspicion that it worked), so we couldn’t try it out.
As for Anand, he is convinced that he is a genius and has launched a new project—something about a telephone to contact creatures in outer space. Tell you all about it next time.
anita rau BaDami niggling: slight feeling (of)
Let us discuss
Arrange the following events in the correct order of occurrence.
1. The door swings open, and they see Boppa, standing there with an evil grin.
2. Boppa is nowhere to be found, but his green scarf is lying near the time machine.
3. Mrs. Sharma, her husband, and Dr. Mohan unlock the door and enter the house to help the children.
4. Anita wakes Anand up, informing him that someone is trying to get into the house.
5. Anand misleads Boppa into entering his room instead of his father’s room.
Reprint 2026-27
D reams anD Discoveries
Let us think and reflect
I Read the extracts given below and answer the questions that follow.
1. Before beginning this story, let me put you in the picture. I am
Anita, fourteen years old. My brother Anand, one year younger than me, caused all that hoo-ha with his burglar alarm. The trouble with him is that he thinks he is a scientist. He loves tinkering with all sorts of electrical gadgets, tools, dynamos, planks of wood, and things like that. And he keeps creating
‘inventions’ that never work out as they are supposed to.
(i) Complete the following sentence suitably by choosing the correct option from those given in the brackets.
When Anita says, “…let me put you in the picture”, she wants to _________ (introduce/summarise) the situation for the benefit of the readers.
(ii) Anand loves ‘tinkering’ with all sorts of electrical gadgets. This means that he enjoys _________ gadgets.
A. dismantling and creating B. labelling or naming
C. repairing or improving D. collecting and displaying (iii) Which of the following options most suitably describes Anand’s personality?
A. methodical and cautious B. creative and experimental
C. energetic and hasty D. shy and reserved (iv) Based on the extract, compare what Anita thinks of her brother
Anand with what he thinks of himself.
2. I was about to direct him upstairs, when Anand said quickly,
“The one next to this one.”
“You silly goose!” I said angrily as soon as the man had gone.
“That’s your room. He’ll come back as mad as mad can be.”
“At least it will give us some time to think of something,” Anand said. “He’ll take a while to locate the light switch. Let’s shout.”
All of a sudden there was a crash followed by a loud scream.
More strange noises emerged from the next room—a few muffled thumps, an eerie whine, and a low, humming sound.
(i) Complete the sentence given below with a suitable reason.
Anita was angry with Anand because ____________.
(ii) Which action of Anand shows his presence of mind?
Reprint 2026-27 creative curious careful responsible bothersome confident
Character Traits Evidence from the Text
1. bothersome And this is not the first time he’s got on
Papa’s nerves or frightened someone half to death in the house.
2. ____________ He loves tinkering with all sorts of electrical gadgets, tools, dynamos, planks of wood, and things like that. And he keeps creating ‘inventions’ that never work out as they are supposed to.
3. ____________ “Nothing will go wrong this time. I’ve planned it out carefully. See the blueprint.”
1. ___________ “We’re old enough to look after ourselves,
2. ___________ “But how does the alarm know that a burglar is opening the door?”
3. ___________ “Now clean up this mess before anyone gets home.” (iii) What might be the cause of the strange noises emerging from the next room?
A. The intruder moving furniture around
B. Anand’s time machine getting activated
C. The intruder locating the light switch
D. Anand’s invention malfunctioning (iv) Which of the following best describes the atmosphere in this extract?
A. relaxing B. peaceful C. tense D. sad
E. suspenseful F. joyful (a) A, D and E (b) B and F (c) C and E (d) Only D
II Complete the table with the suitable traits of the characters based on evidence from the text. Choose the traits given in the box below.
An example has been done for you.
Reprint 2026-27
Onomatopoeia is the use of words that imitate actual sounds of the thing they describe. The ‘boom’ of a firework exploding, the
‘ding-dong’ of a bell, the
‘pitter-patter’ of rain drops, the ‘tick-tock’ of a clock are all examples of onomatopoeia.
1. Read the sound words used in the story in Column 1. Complete
Column 2 by matching expressions from the box given below. An example has been done for you.
whispered angrily constant and loud construction noises sudden loud sound of breaking a continuous low and soothing sound
Column 1 Column 2 (i) Crash sudden loud sound of breaking (ii) Humming (iii) Hissed (iv) Hammering, sawing, clattering
Let us learn
I Read the highlighted word in the following sentence.
It’s quite simple. The moment the door opens, this alarm is tripped off and makes a clanging sound.
Such sound words are called onomatopoeic words.
D reams anD Discoveries
III Answer the following questions.
1. What prompted Anand to create the burglar alarm?
2. How did Anand’s father become the target of the burglar alarm?
3. How did Anand’s parents and sister react to his ideas?
4. How did Anand behave when he was on his ‘inventing binges’?
5. Why did Mr. Sharma not believe Anand when he spoke about his time machine?
6. Give an ending to this story, explaining what might have happened to
Reprint 2026-27 tripped off let up turned out ran out of rigged up
1. Match the words in Column 1 with the correct pairs in Column 2 to make binomials.
Column 1 Conjunction Column 2 (i) safe
A. break (ii) odds B. cons (iii) make C. never (iv) pros D. take (v) now E. sound (vi) give F. ends
2. Complete the following sentences with suitable binomials from 1.
(i) This project will be a ______________ moment for our team’s success.
(ii) After a long journey, we were relieved to arrive home
______________.
(iii) Every friendship works well when there is a balance of
______________.
(iv) She organised all the ______________ in the cupboard, to make space for new clothes.
(v) Before making a decision, it is important to weigh the
______________ carefully.
(vi) This is our final chance to perform on stage, it is ______________.
3. Complete the paragraph by using the phrasal verbs given in the box below.
Binomials are expressions consisting of two words, usually linked by a conjunction such as ‘and’ or ‘or’ that are commonly used together in a fixed order. The two words convey a single meaning or an opposite.
II Read the highlighted phrase in the following sentence from the text.
Well, that was the end of peace and quiet in the house.
The highlighted phrase displays a combination of two words generally used together in a fixed order. Such phrases are called binomials.
Reprint 2026-27
It had been
