The Tunnel
Let us do these activities before we read.
I What kind of an adventure activity would you like to be a part of?
Now, choose the option(s) that best applies to you.
1. How would you like to spend your weekends?
(i) Trying new activities (ii) Reading a book (iii) Spending time with friends (iv) Learning something new
2. Which of these places would you prefer to explore?
(i) Dense forests and clear streams (ii) Magical lands with fairies (iii) Busy cities with interesting people (iv) Quiet places to think and create
3. Which one of these activities would you prefer to do?
(i) Climbing a mountain or exploring a jungle (ii) Finding a hidden treasure or discovering a secret world (iii) Solving puzzles or guessing riddles with friends (iv) Making something creative or building a model
TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE
4. What do you think about teamwork?
(i) I love leading the team.
(ii) I enjoy working with others.
(iii) I prefer sharing ideas with friends.
(iv) I like working alone.
Reprint 2026-27
Based on your choices, which of the following do you think applies the best to you? Discuss with your classmates.
• Bold Explorer • Imaginative Dreamer
• Energetic Planner • Thoughtful Creator
You may add to the list as per your choices.
Let us read shimmered:
shined with a light that appears to embankment:
a stone wall made to carry the railway over low ground scrub-covered:
covered with short trees and
It was almost noon, and the jungle was very still, very silent.
Heat waves shimmered along the railway embankment where it cut a path through the tall evergreen trees. The railway lines were two straight black serpents disappearing into the tunnel in the hillside.
Suraj stood near the cutting, waiting for the midday train. It wasn’t a station, and he wasn’t catching a train. He was waiting so that he could watch the steam engine come roaring out of the tunnel.
He had cycled out of the town and taken the jungle path until he had come to a small village. He had left the cycle there, and walked over a low scrub-covered hill and down to the tunnel
Now he looked up. He had heard, in the distance, the shrill whistle of the engine. He couldn’t see anything, because the train was approaching from the other side of the hill;
cutting: a narrow valley cut through a hill to make space for a railway line
Reprint 2026-27
Travel and advenTure instinctively:
without thought flinch: make a quick movement plume of smoke: long, thin cloud of shisham: a tree found in northern parts of India contemplation:
deep thought reassure:
comfort, calm but presently a sound like distant thunder issued from the tunnel, and he knew the train was coming through.
A second or two later, the steam engine shot out of the tunnel, snorting and puffing like some green, black, and gold dragon, some beautiful monster out of Suraj’s dreams. Showering sparks left and right, it roared a challenge to the jungle.
Instinctively, Suraj stepped back a few paces. Waves of hot steam struck him in the face. Even the trees seemed to flinch from the noise and heat. And then the train had gone, leaving only a plume of smoke to drift lazily over the tall shisham
The jungle was still again. No one moved.
Suraj turned from his contemplation of the drifting smoke and began walking along the embankment towards the tunnel.
The tunnel grew darker as he walked further into it. When he had gone about twenty yards, it became pitch dark. Suraj had to turn and look back at the opening to reassure himself that there was still daylight outside. Ahead of him, the tunnel’s other opening was just a small round circle of light.
The tunnel was still full of smoke from the train, but it would be several hours before another train came through. Till then, the cutting belonged to the jungle again.
Reprint 2026-27
Suraj didn’t stop, because there was nothing to do in the tunnel and nothing to see. He had simply wanted to walk through, so that he would know what the inside of a tunnel was really like. The walls were damp and sticky. A bat flew past. A lizard scuttled between the lines.
Coming straight from the darkness into the light, Suraj was dazzled by the sudden glare and put a hand up to shade his eyes. He looked up at the tree-covered hillside and thought he saw something moving between the trees.
scuttled: ran hurriedly obstacles:
things that block the way porcupine: a small animal (large rodent)
with sharp spikes on its back dazzled:
blinded by bright light swishing:
moving with a brushing sound
It was just a flash of orange and gold, and a long swishing tail. It was there between the trees for a second or two, and then it was gone.
About fifteen metres from the entrance to the tunnel stood the watchman’s hut. Marigolds grew in front of the hut, and at the back there was a small vegetable patch. It was the watchman’s duty to inspect the tunnel and keep it clear of obstacles.
Every day, before the train came through, he would walk the length of the tunnel. If all was well, he would return to his hut and take a nap. If something was wrong, he would walk back up the line and wave a red flag, and the engine driver would slow down. At night, the watchman lit an oil lamp and made a similar inspection of the tunnel. Of course, he would not stop the train if there was a porcupine on the line. But if there was any danger to the train, he’d go back up the line and wave his lamp to the approaching engine.
If all was well, he’d hang his lamp at the door of his hut and go to sleep.
He was just settling down on his cot for an afternoon nap when he saw the boy emerge from the tunnel. He waited until
Suraj was only a metre or so away and then said, “Welcome, welcome. I don’t often have visitors. Sit down for a while, and tell me why you were inspecting my tunnel.”
“Is it your tunnel?” asked Suraj.
Reprint 2026-27
Travel and advenTure
“It is,” said the watchman. “It is truly my tunnel, since no one else will have anything to do with it. I have only lent it to the
Government.”
Suraj sat down on the edge of the cot.
“I wanted to see the train come through,” he said. “And then, when it had gone, I thought I’d walk through the tunnel.”
“And what did you find in it?”
“Nothing. It was very dark. But when I came out, I thought I saw an animal—up on the hill—but I’m not sure, it moved off very quickly.”
“It was a leopard you saw,” said the watchman. “My leopard.”
“Do you own a leopard too?”
“And do you lend it to the Government?”
“I do not.”
“Is it dangerous?”
“No, it’s a leopard that minds its own business. It comes to this range for a few days every month.”
“Have you been here a long time?” asked Suraj.
“Many years. My name is Sunder Singh.”
“My name’s Suraj.”
“There is one train during the day. And there is one train range: area
Reprint 2026-27 during the night. Have you seen the night mail come through the tunnel?”
“No. At what time does it come?”
“About nine o’clock, if it isn’t late. You could come and sit here with me, if you like. And after it has gone, instead of going to sleep I will take you home.”
“I’ll ask my parents,” said Suraj. “Will it be safe?”
“Of course. It is safer in the jungle than in the town. Nothing happens to me out here. But last month, when I went into town, I was almost run over by a bus.”
Sunder Singh yawned and stretched himself out on the cot.
“And now I am going to take a nap, my friend. It is too hot to be up and about in the afternoon.”
“Everyone goes to sleep in the afternoon,” complained Suraj.
“My father lies down as soon as he’s had his lunch.”
“Well, the animals also rest in the heat of the day. It is only the tribe of boys who cannot, or will not, rest.”
Sunder Singh placed a large banana leaf over his face to keep away the flies, and was soon snoring gently. Suraj stood up, looking up and down the railway tracks. Then he began walking back to the village.
Let us discuss
1. Suraj compares the train to a magical creature. Pick the phrases that convey the meaning.
2. Suraj knew that the train was close by because ____________________.
3. What did Suraj see inside the tunnel?
4. Select the correct option.
What does Sunder Singh convey about the tunnel?
He says that ____________________ (it is damp and sticky inside/he has lent it to the Government).
5. The watchman has created a system through which he informs the locomotive driver about any danger in the tunnel. The following flow chart shows this system. Refer to the text and complete the flow chart.
night mail: a train that runs at night
Reprint 2026-27
Travel and advenTure swooped:
moved quickly through the air downwards
Walks the length of the tunnel (i) _________ (iv) _________ (v) _________
Goes to take
Waves his warn the locomotive (ii) _________ (iii) _________
No danger
The following evening, towards dusk, as the flying foxes swooped silently out of the trees, Suraj made his way to the watchman’s hut.
It had been a long hot day, but now the earth was cooling, and a light breeze was moving through the trees. It carried with it the scent of mango blossoms, the promise of rain.
Sunder Singh was waiting for Suraj. He had watered his small garden, and the flowers looked cool and fresh. A kettle was boiling on a small oil stove.
“I am making tea,” he said. “There is nothing like a glass of hot tea while waiting for a train.”
They drank their tea, listening to the sharp notes of the tailorbird and the noisy chatter of the seven sisters.
seven sisters:
birds, also called jungle babblers and found in groups of six to eight
Reprint 2026-27
As the brief twilight faded, most of the birds fell silent. Sunder
Singh lit his oil lamp and said it was time for him to inspect the tunnel. He moved off towards the tunnel, while Suraj sat on the cot, sipping his tea. In the dark, the trees seemed to move closer to him. And the nightlife of the forest was conveyed on the breeze—the sharp call of a barking deer, the cry of a fox, the quaint tonk-tonk of a nightjar. There were some sounds that Suraj didn’t recognise—sounds that came from the trees, creakings and whisperings, as though the trees were coming to life, stretching their limbs in the dark, shifting a little, flexing their fingers.
Sunder Singh stood inside the tunnel, trimming his lamp.
The night sounds were familiar to him and he did not give them much thought; but something else—a padded footfall, a rustle of dry leaves—made him stand still for a few seconds, peering into the darkness. Then, humming softly to himself, he returned to where Suraj was waiting. Ten minutes remained for the night mail to arrive.
As Sunder Singh sat down on the cot beside Suraj, a new sound reached both of them quite distinctly—a rhythmic sawing sound, as if someone cutting through the branch of a tree.
“What’s that?” whispered Suraj.
“It’s the leopard,” said Sunder Singh. “I think it’s in the tunnel.”
“The train will soon be here,” said Suraj.
“Yes, my friend. And if we don’t drive the leopard out of the tunnel, it will be run over and killed. I can’t let that happen.”
“But won’t it attack us if we try to drive it out?” asked Suraj, beginning to share the watchman’s concern.
“Not this leopard. It knows me well. We have seen each other many times. It has a weakness for goats and stray dogs, but it will not harm us. Even so, I’ll take my axe with me. You stay here, Suraj.”
“No, I’m coming with you. It will be better than sitting here alone in the dark!”
“All right, but stay close behind me. And remember, there is nothing to fear.” quaint: unusual nightjar: a nocturnal bird with a short bill trimming:
(here) adjusting the wick of the flexing: bending
Reprint 2026-27
Travel and advenTure
Raising his lamp, Sunder Singh advanced into the tunnel, shouting at the top of his voice to try and scare away the animal. Suraj followed close behind, but he found he was unable to do any shouting. His throat was quite dry.
lithe: thin, graceful sinewy: lean and muscular snarling:
growling twitching: a short, sudden movement
They had gone about twenty paces into the tunnel when the light from the lamp fell upon the leopard. It was crouching between the tracks, only five metres away from them. It was not a very big leopard, but it looked lithe and sinewy. Baring its teeth and snarling, it went down on its belly, tail twitching.
Suraj and Sunder Singh both shouted together. Their voices rang through the tunnel. And the leopard, uncertain as to how many terrifying humans were there in the tunnel with him, turned swiftly and disappeared into the darkness.
To make sure that it had gone, Sunder Singh and Suraj walked the length of the tunnel. When they returned to the entrance, the rails were beginning to hum. They knew the train was
Suraj put his hand to one of the rails and felt its tremor. He heard the distant rumble of the train. And then the engine came round the bend, hissing at them, scattering sparks into the darkness, defying the jungle as it roared through the steep defying:
opposing
Reprint 2026-27 sides of the cutting. It charged straight at the tunnel, and into it, thundering past Suraj like the beautiful dragon of his dreams.
And when it had gone, the silence returned and the forest flickering:
unsteadily fringe: edge shrill: sharp seemed to breathe, to live again. Only the rails still trembled with the passing of the train.
They trembled again to the passing of the same train, almost a week later, when
Suraj and his father were both travelling
Suraj’s father was scribbling in a notebook, doing his accounts. Suraj sat at an open window staring out at the darkness. His father was going to Delhi on a business trip and had decided to take the boy along. (“I don’t know where he gets to, most of the time,” he’d complained. “I think it’s time he learnt something about my business.”)
The night mail rushed through the forest with its hundreds of passengers. The carriage wheels beat out a steady rhythm on the rails. Tiny flickering lights came and went, as they passed small villages on the fringe of the jungle.
Suraj heard the rumble as the train passed over a small bridge.
It was too dark to see the hut near the cutting, but he knew they must be approaching the tunnel. He strained his eyes looking out into the night; and then, just as the engine let out a shrill whistle, Suraj saw the lamp.
He couldn’t see Sunder Singh, but he saw the lamp, and he knew that his friend was out there.
The train went into the tunnel and out again; it left the jungle behind and thundered across the endless plains.
Suraj stared out at the darkness, thinking of the lonely cutting in the forest and the watchman with the lamp, who would always remain a firefly for those travelling thousands as he lit up the darkness for steam engines and leopards.
Ruskin Bond
Reprint 2026-27
Travel and advenTure
Let us discuss
1. Sunder Singh knew that the leopard was in the tunnel because ____________.
2. Why do you think Suraj was unable to do any shouting in the tunnel in the beginning?
(i) He was afraid of the leopard.
(ii) He didn’t want to disturb the leopard.
(iii) He was trying to listen for the leopard.
(iv) He didn’t really believe Sunder Singh.
3. What made the leopard disappear into the darkness?
4. How did Suraj know Sunder Singh was at the tunnel?
5. Why did Suraj’s father take him along to Delhi?
Let us think and reflect
I Read the following lines and answer the questions that follow.
1. Suraj had to turn and look back at the opening to reassure himself that there was still daylight outside. Ahead of him, the tunnel’s other opening was just a small round circle of light.
The tunnel was still full of smoke from the train, but it would be several hours before another train came through. Till then, the cutting belonged to the jungle again.
Suraj didn’t stop, because there was nothing to do in the tunnel and nothing to see. He had simply wanted to walk through, so that he would know what the inside of a tunnel was really like.
(i) Write whether the following statement is true or false.
Suraj looked back at the opening of the tunnel to check if the train was coming.
(ii) Choose the correct option to complete the sentence given below.
Suraj did not stop anywhere in the tunnel because _____________.
A. there was nothing to see in the tunnel
B. the tunnel was damp and sticky
C. he was in a hurry to get out of the tunnel
D. it was time for another train to come
Reprint 2026-27 (iii) What does the sentence ‘Till then, the cutting belonged to the jungle again’ mean?
(iv) Suraj wanted to know the inside of the tunnel. What character trait of Suraj is highlighted here?
2. “The train will soon be here,” said Suraj.
“Yes, my friend. And if we don’t drive the leopard out of the tunnel, it will be run over and killed. I can’t let that happen.”
“But won’t it attack us if we try to drive it out?” asked Suraj, beginning to share the watchman’s concern.
“Not this leopard. It knows me well. We have seen each other many times. It has a weakness for goats and stray dogs, but it will not harm us. Even so, I’ll take my axe with me. You stay here, Suraj.” (i) What was the watchman’s concern?
(ii) Complete the sentence with a suitable reason.
Sunder Singh was sure that the leopard in the tunnel would not attack him and Suraj because _____________.
(iii) Select the sentences that are true from those given below.
A. Suraj wants to see the leopards in the jungle.
B. Suraj is concerned about Sunder Singh’s safety.
C. The leopard in the tunnel attacks goats and stray dogs.
D. Sunder Singh wants to protect Suraj.
E. Sunder Singh knows all about the animals in the jungle.
(iv) Choose the correct option to complete the sentence.
Sunder Singh decides to take his axe with him. This tells us that he was _____________.
A. violent B. cautious C. bold D. afraid
II Answer the following questions.
1. What does Sunder Singh convey by saying that he has lent his tunnel to the Government?
2. According to Sunder Singh, “It is safer in the forest than in the town”.
What example does Sunder Singh give to support his opinion? What does this
