Conquering The SummiT
Let us do these activities before we read.
I Identify the activities represented by the icons given below. Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher.
II Work in pairs and discuss the following questions.
1. Why do you think people undertake the activities identified above?
2. How would they prepare for these activities?
3. Which one of them do you find the most exciting? Why?
Share your answers with the teacher.
III Work in pairs to complete the word web given below. Share the answers with the teacher.
Qualities mountaineer
Reprint 2026-27
Travel and advenTure
Let us read
This is a story that narrates the triumph of will, courage, determination, and dedication. Arunima
Sinha’s journey from a devastating accident to scaling the highest peak in the world stands as a beacon of hope and resilience. In 2011, at the age of 24, Arunima Sinha, a national-level volleyball player, faced a life-altering event. It challenged her in ways she could never have imagined. As she lay in the hospital bed with one leg amputated,
Arunima made a vow that many would deem impossible: not only to walk again with a prosthetic leg but to scale Mount Everest. In 2013, she did just that, becoming the first Indian female amputee to achieve this feat. Hence, in 2015, she was awarded the Padma Shri, the fourth highest civilian award in India. She was also awarded the
Tenzing Norgay National Adventure Award and Courtesy: Hindustan Times source of inspiration resilience:
ability to recover quickly from a difficulty amputated: cut off a part of the body (here the prosthetic leg:
an artificial leg that helps people to move around easily achievement harrowing:
extremely disturbing and rigorous:
National Award for Best Female Mountaineer.
Arunima hails from Ambedkar Nagar, a small district in Uttar
Pradesh. Her father was an army engineer, and her mother worked as a health supervisor. Sports were a significant part of Arunima’s life, with her family having a natural inclination towards athletics. After completing her law degree following her post-graduation, Arunima decided to pursue a job in the paramilitary forces, which would allow her to continue her passion for sports while having a regular income.
On the fateful night of 11 April 2011, she met with a train accident. The hours that followed were harrowing. She never imagined she would survive that night, but survive she did, miraculously, displaying an extraordinary will to live. Arunima received a prosthetic leg and underwent physiotherapy. It was during this period that she made a profound decision. Inspired by an article about Mount Everest, she resolved to conquer the highest peak in the world.
To pursue her ambition, Arunima Sinha completed a basic mountaineering course at the Nehru Institute of
Mountaineering in Uttarkashi, followed by eighteen months of rigorous training. Arunima approached Bachendri Pal, the
Reprint 2026-27 first Indian woman to summit Everest, to guide her in the endeavour. Bachendri Pal instilled confidence in Arunima and said, “My child, you decided to climb Mount Everest in these situations with a prosthetic leg—you have conquered the Everest within you; the world will realise it later.”
On 21 May 2013, after 52 exhausting days, Arunima Sinha reached the summit of Mount Everest. Standing at the top of the world, she felt a surge of emotions—pride, relief, and an overwhelming sense of achievement. She displayed the
Indian flag at the summit and left behind a photograph of her idol, Swami Vivekananda, whose teachings had inspired her throughout her journey.
Arunima’s feat did not end with Everest. By July 2016, she had summited seven peaks in Europe, Africa, Australia,
South America, North America, and of course, Mount Everest in Asia.
In January 2019, she climbed the seventh peak on Antarctica and became world’s first female amputee to climb Mount Vinson. Her goal to complete the Seven Summits was achieved.
Throughout her journey, Arunima has faced numerous challenges and setbacks. Yet, her story is not just about physical endurance but also about mental endeavour: an attempt to do something surge: a sudden and great increase endurance:
(here) ability to continue doing something difficult for a long time
Reprint 2026-27
Travel and advenTure adversity:
a difficult situation testament:
conferred:
given an official title or honour fortitude:
courage over a long period fortitude and the power of a positive mind set. Her message is simple yet profound: “Never give up and work hard. Always remember your goal and work on it.”
Arunima’s autobiography, Born Again on the Mountain: A Story of Losing Everything and Finding It Back records her incredible journey to the top of the world. It is a story of triumph over adversity, a testament to the human spirit’s capacity to rise above the most challenging circumstances.
She was conferred with the honorary doctorate by the
University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, UK. In her words, “Failure is not when we fall short of achieving our goals. It is when we don’t have goals worthy enough. Never forget your goal, respect it, work hard, and you will be the winner.” Dr. Arunima
Sinha has not only conquered mountains but has also won people’s hearts the world over, inspiring them to reach their own summits.
Let us discuss
I Read the statements given below and explain each statement in your
1. Arunima Sinha is considered a beacon of hope and resilience.
2. Arunima decided to climb Mount Everest despite losing her leg.
3. Bachendri Pal’s guidance was crucial in Arunima’s journey to the summit of Mount Everest.
4. Arunima’s achievements go beyond just physical endurance.
5. Arunima’s autobiography inspires readers around the world.
Antarctica
Europe Denali
North America Everest
Aconcagua
South America
Kilimanjaro
Kosciuszko
Australia
Reprint 2026-27
Let us think and reflect
I Read the extract given below and answer the questions that follow.
Bachendri Pal instilled confidence in Arunima and said, “My child, you decided to climb Mount Everest in these situations with a prosthetic leg— you have conquered the Everest within you; the world will realise it later.”
On 21 May 2013, after 52 exhausting days, Arunima Sinha reached the summit of Mount Everest. Standing at the top of the world, she felt a surge of emotions—pride, relief, and an overwhelming sense of achievement.
1. Complete the sentence with a suitable reason.
Bachendri Pal said that Arunima had conquered the Everest within her because ___________________.
2. How might Arunima have felt after what Bachendri Pal told her?
3. Choose a phrase from the extract which shows that reaching the summit of Mount Everest was tiring.
4. Select the correct option to complete the sentence.
After her success when Arunima felt ‘an overwhelming sense of achievement’, she would have most likely said, “___________________.” (i) I am confident of my abilities (ii) I will accomplish this soon (iii) I am excited to begin this climb (iv) I finally realised my dream
II Answer the following questions.
1. What did Arunima do in order to fulfill her ambition of conquering Mount Everest?
2. Arunima is a beacon of hope and resilience. Support this statement with evidence from the text.
3. Arunima’s autobiography is titled Born Again on the
Mountain: A Story of Losing Everything and Finding It
Back. Why do you think this title is appropriate?
4. Arunima says, “Failure is when we don’t have goals worthy enough.” What would be the most likely impact of this statement on readers?
Reprint 2026-27
Let us learn
I Read the underlined phrases in sentences (i)–(v) and match them with their appropriate meanings given in the box below.
1. genuine, sincere efforts 2. strength of mind
3. periods of time filled with tiring and demanding activities
4. an incident or experience that significantly changes a person’s life
5. a source of inspiration or encouragement (i) Nisha was relieved when the final match was over after several exhausting days of practice.
(ii) Despite several failures, her heartfelt attempts to learn the guitar showed her determination and passion for music.
(iii) Moving to a new city was a life-altering event for Jagan, as it gave him the chance to make new friends and try different activities.
(iv) Competing in the marathon requires not just physical strength but also mental fortitude to stay focused and finish the race.
(v) The lighthouse served as a beacon of hope for the sailors lost
II Complete the following table by filling in the gaps with correct parts of speech mentioned. An example has been done for you.
Nouns Adjectives Verbs (present) Adverbs determination determined determine determinedly relief relievedly inspiring inspire resistance resistantly success successful
TRavel and advenTuRe
Reprint 2026-27
III Study the highlighted words in the following sentences from the text.
• Arunima made a vow that many would deem impossible.
• Her father was an army engineer.
• Standing at the top of the world, she felt a surge of emotions—pride, relief, and an overwhelming sense of achievement.
• She planted the Indian flag at the summit and left behind a photograph of her idol, Swami Vivekananda.
• Arunima Sinha’s journey from a devastating accident to scaling the highest peak in the world stands as a beacon of hope and resilience.
The highlighted words are articles.
‘A’ and ‘an’ are indefinite articles; ‘the’ is the definite article. The choice between ‘a’ and ‘an’ depends on the sound that follows the article, specifically the initial sound of the word that follows.
1. Fill in the blanks with ‘a’, ‘an’, ‘the’. Put an ‘x’ where no article is required.
We planned (i) _______ adventurous trip to (ii) _______ remote island.
(iii) _______ island was known for its beautiful landscapes and (iv)
_______ diverse wildlife. On (v) _______ first day, we set out to explore (vi) _______ island’s dense jungle. (vii) _______ guide led us through (viii) _______ thick foliage and showed us (ix) _______ hidden waterfall.
In (x) _______ evening, we gathered around (xi) _______ campfire to share stories and enjoy (xii) _______ meal we cooked. (xiii) _______ experience was truly unforgettable, and we felt (xiv) _______ connection with (xv) _______ nature.
2. There is an error in each sentence that has been underlined. Correct the error in the following sentences.
(i) We waited for a hour before the bus finally arrived.
(ii) The guide insisted on an uniform jacket for the group’s safety during the trek.
(iii) Mount K2 is a second highest peak in the world.
(iv) A Ganga is a sacred river in India, known for its cultural importance.
(v) Challenges are faced with courage and determination by a brave.
(vi) A North Star has guided travellers for centuries.
Reprint 2026-27
Travel and advenTure
Let us listen
You will listen to five speakers share their opinion about adventure sports. As you listen match the statements 1–8 with the speakers (i)–(v). There are three extra statements that you do not need.
(Transcript for the teacher on pg. 177)
1. Talks about having basic activities in adventure sports
2. Finds adventure sports thrilling and exciting
3. Praises the availability of a variety of activities
4. Expresses concern about the risks in adventure sports
5. Promotes trekking as a casual sport
6. Invites applications from first-timers
7. Focuses on the availability of training and supervision
8. Finds exposure to risks unnecessary
Statements Speaker no.
Let us speak
In groups of four, select a role from 1–4 given below and speak about the views allotted to each. Use the prompts and vocabulary given. Take turns to express your opinions, agreement, and disagreement.
Role-Specific Prompts
1. School Student: Talk about why you think Physical Education should be included in school activities.
2. Parent: Discuss your concerns or support for your child participating in
Physical Education activities.
3. Physical Education Teacher: Share your experiences about Physical
Education activities and why you think they are valuable.
Reprint 2026-27
4. Sports Camp Organiser: Explain how you ensure safety and why you believe sports are beneficial for participants.
• In my opinion... • I believe that...
• From my point of view... • I disagree with...
• One reason for this is... • I agree with the idea that...
• I disagree with the notion that...
• I support this perspective because...
• I find it hard to agree because...
Vocabulary you may use precautions unique experiences fun safe enjoyable thrilling builds confidence concern explore overcome fear participate
Let us write
Read the various components of a formal letter from the box given below.
complimentary close receiver’s address subject date introduction statement of request expression of interest salutation signature line sender’s address
1. Now, read the letter given below and write the matching components.
Sender’s Address
Receiver’s Address
_________School
Subject: Request to join Adventure Club
Madam/Sir,
I am Sreelakshmi, a student of Grade 7-C. I am interested in adventure activities like trekking, hiking, rope climbing, and exploring sites of natural beauty.
I would love to be a part of the Adventure Club of the school and participate in the adventure activities organised.
I request you to grant me permission to join the club.
Yours sincerely,
Sreelakshmi
Reprint 2026-27
Let us explore
I Find out more information about the following adventure sports in our country and complete the table given below.
Name Area Preferred Time of the Year
Equipment
Required snow skiing snow- covered hills skis, ski suit, trekking Spring, Autumn,
Winter pole camping grassy areas tent, torch, river rafting all year round scuba diving scuba suit, mask, fins,
II Prepare an information booklet with fact sheets of five Indian mountaineers. Include the following information in the fact sheet.
1. name (and photograph, if available)
2. place of birth 5. training received
3. profession 6. sport known for (if any)
4. accomplishments—awards or honours
2. Write a letter to the Principal of your school requesting her to organise an excursion to a nearby hill station for Grade 7 students of your school.
TRavel and advenTuRe
Reprint 2026-27
Let us listen (refer to page 153)
A famous museum in your town is organising a treasure hunt in the museum premises. You and your friends decide to participate in it. Upon arrival, you find that there are many other teams. Each team is given an audio guide (recorded information) and a map to the museum.
1. Look at the map given below. Try and predict what each of the rooms might be.
2. Listen to the audio recording and as you listen, mark your map with the route to take to find the treasure. To help you, the names of a few rooms in the museum are given below. Now listen to the audio and mark the various rooms.
Welcome to the City Museum. We start our tour at the entrance hall. Here you will find the information booth and a display devoted to the history of this museum. To the right of the
Entrance Hall you will find the (i) library. On the left is the museum shop. Go straight from the Entrance Hall till you reach the (ii) Art Gallery. The gallery is famous for its collection of rare paintings from various parts of India. There are three doors that lead out of the Art Gallery. The first door on the left leads to the
Decorative Art Gallery, where you will find items like jewellery, carvings, and textiles from Medieval India. The next door is temporarily closed due to renovation work. The third door on the right leads to the (iii) Weapons Room, where you will find an extensive collection of Indian weapons including bows, swords, shields, and helmets. From the weapons room take a left turn.
You will find the world-famous (iv) Musical Instruments Section, where you can find musical instruments from every country in the world. The second room to the left in this gallery will take you to the (v) Auditorium. Hidden here is your treasure! All the best to all. May the best team win!
TRANSCRIPTS
Reprint 2026-27
Let us listen (refer to page 162)
1. Listen to this announcement made in the morning assembly about a school trip to the National Science Centre. As you listen, circle the words that are not correct.
Good morning students!
I have some very exciting news to share with you all. The much- awaited educational trip to the National Science Centre will be held on 16 September, that is in two weeks! As you know this would be a fantastic opportunity to explore and learn more about the world around us.
We will be starting from school at 8.00 in the morning and return by 5.30 in the evening. All of you must be in proper school uniform.
Don’t forget to carry your identity cards. Light refreshments will be provided at the museum. But do carry a water bottle and a packed lunch. You are not permitted to wear any jewellery or carry mobile phones. You may carry a notebook and a pen to make notes. Interested students must bring a permission slip signed by your parent and submit them to their class teachers by 10 September. It is going to be a fun trip so don’t miss out. If you have any more questions, please contact Mr. Mukherjee, the excursion in-charge.
2. Now, listen to the announcement again and rectify the sentences.
Conquering The SummiT
Let us listen (refer to page 173)
You will listen to five speakers share their opinion about adventure sports. As you listen match the statements 1–8 with the speakers (i)–(v).
There are three extra statements that you do not need.
Speaker (i): As a parent, I fear the risks involved, especially with activities like rock climbing or paragliding.
TRavel and advenTuRe
Reprint 2026-27
I’m quite worried about the safety risks of adventure sports. It’s important to consider these risks before letting children participate.
Speaker (ii): Adventure sports are thrilling! All my friends agree; it is amazing. It’s not just about fun; it’s about pushing your limits and experiencing something new. I t
