MATRICES 35 of notebooks and pens by Radha and her two friends Fauzia and Simran which is as follows:
Radha has 15 notebooks and 6 pens,
Fauzia has 10 notebooks and 2 pens,
Simran has 13 notebooks and 5 pens.
Now this could be arranged in the tabular form as follows:
Notebooks Pens
Radha 15 6
Fauzia 10 2
Simran 13 5 and this can be expressed as
Radha Fauzia Simran
Notebooks 15 10 13
Pens 6 2 5 which can be expressed as:
In the first arrangement the entries in the first column represent the number of note books possessed by Radha, Fauzia and Simran, respectively and the entries in the second column represent the number of pens possessed by Radha, Fauzia and Simran,
Reprint 2026-27
36 MATHEMATICS respectively. Similarly, in the second arrangement, the entries in the first row represent the number of notebooks possessed by Radha, Fauzia and Simran, respectively. The entries in the second row represent the number of pens possessed by Radha, Fauzia and Simran, respectively. An arrangement or display of the above kind is called a matrix. Formally, we define matrix as:
Definition 1 A matrix is an ordered rectangular array of numbers or functions. The numbers or functions are called the elements or the entries of the matrix.
We denote matrices by capital letters. The following are some examples of matrices:
B 3.5 –1 2
C cos tan sin 2
In the above examples, the horizontal lines of elements are said to constitute, rows of the matrix and the vertical lines of elements are said to constitute, columns of the matrix. Thus A has 3 rows and 2 columns, B has 3 rows and 3 columns while C has 2 rows and 3 columns.
3.2.1 Order of a matrix
A matrix having m rows and n columns is called a matrix of order m × n or simply m × n matrix (read as an m by n matrix). So referring to the above examples of matrices, we have A as 3 × 2 matrix, B as 3 × 3 matrix and C as 2 × 3 matrix. We observe that A has
3 × 2 = 6 elements, B and C have 9 and 6 elements, respectively.
In general, an m × n matrix has the following rectangular array:
or A = [aij]m × n, 1≤ i ≤ m, 1≤ j ≤ n i, j ∈ N
Thus the ith row consists of the elements ai1, ai2, ai3,..., ain, while the jth column consists of the elements a1j, a2j, a3j,..., amj ,
In general aij, is an element lying in the ith row and jth column. We can also call it as the (i, j)th element of A. The number of elements in an m × n matrix will be equal to mn.
Reprint 2026-27
