Quadrilaterals
We can compute the four angles between the diagonals to be x, x, 180 – x, and 180 – x.
Can you find the other angles?
Since we know that ∆AOB is isosceles, we can denote the measures of both of its base angles by a.
What is the value of a (in degrees) in terms of x?
We have, a + a + x = 180 (sum of the interior angles of a triangle)
2a = 180 – x a = (180 – x)
2 = 90 – x
Similarly, in the isosceles ∆AOD, let the base angles be b.
b + b + 180 – x = 180
2b = 180 – (180 – x)
2b = 180 – 180 + x
All the angles of the quadrilateral are a + b, which is
Thus, all four angles of the quadrilateral ABCD are 90°.
What can we say about AB and CD, and AD and BC?
We have ∆AOB ≅ ∆COD and ∆AOD ≅ ∆COB. Hence, AB = CD, and AD = CB, since they are the corresponding parts of congruent triangles.
180° – x 180° – x
Reprint 2026-27
Ganita Prakash | Grade 8
Hence, no matter what the angles between the diagonals are, if the diagonals are equal and they bisect each other, then the angles of the quadrilateral formed are 90° each, and the opposite sides are equal.
Thus, the quadrilateral is a rectangle.
Now we know how the wooden strips have to be put together to form the vertices of a rectangle! They should be equal and connected at their midpoints.
This method is actually used in practice to make rectangles. Carpenters in Europe use this method to get a rectangular frame. It is also known that farmers in Mozambique, a country in Africa, use this method while constructing houses to get the base of the house in a rectangular shape.
The Process of Finding Properties
As we have been seeing from lower grades, properties of geometric objects such as parallel lines, angles, and triangles can be deduced through geometric reasoning.
We will continue to deduce properties of special types of quadrilaterals in this chapter.
Once you have deduced a property of a quadrilateral, it is good to verify it with a real-world quadrilateral, either the quadrilateral constructed on paper or simply a surface having the shape of the quadrilateral.
If you are not able to figure out the property using deduction, you could experiment by taking real-world quadrilaterals and observing the property through measurement. Note that these observations give useful insights about the property, but with them, we can only form a conjecture, that is, a statement about which we are highly confident, but not yet sure if it always holds true. For example, constructing a few rectangles and observing through measurement that their diagonals bisect each other does not necessarily mean that this will always be the case — can we be sure that the 1000th rectangle we construct will also have this property? The only way we can be sure of this property is by justifying or proving the statement, just as we did in Deduction 2.
C A C O O O
4 cm 4 cm 4 cm 4 cm 4 cm 4 cm
Note to the Teacher: Gently encourage students to deduce or justify properties.
Whenever students face challenges in doing it, encourage them to experiment and observe, and use their intuition to figure out the properties.
Reprint 2026-27
Quadrilaterals
The Carpenter’s Problem shows that rectangles can also be defined as follows —
Rectangle: A rectangle is a quadrilateral whose diagonals are equal and bisect each other.
Observe how different this definition is from the earlier one. Yet, both capture the same class of quadrilaterals. Further, it turns out that the first definition can be simplified.
In the earlier definition, we stated that a rectangle has (a) opposite sides of equal length, and (b) all angles equal to 90°. Would we be wrong if we just define a rectangle as a quadrilateral in which all the angles are 90°?
If you think that this definition is incomplete, try constructing a quadrilateral in which the angles are all 90° but the opposite sides are not equal.
Are you able to construct such a quadrilateral?
Let us prove why this is impossible.
Deduction 4 — What is the shape of a quadrilateral with all the angles equal to 90°?
Consider a quadrilateral ABCD with all angles measuring 90°. What can we say about the opposite sides of such a quadrilateral?
Join BD. ∆BAD and ∆DCB seem congruent. Can we justify this claim?
Two equalities can be directly seen in the triangles. What can we say about ∠1 and ∠2?
Recall that we tackled a very similar problem in Deduction 2. We can use the same reasoning here.
Common side
Since ∠B = 90°,
∠3 + ∠1 = 90°.
In ∆BCD, since
∠3 + ∠2 + 90° = 180°,
∠3 + ∠2 = 90°.
Reprint 2026-27
Ganita Prakash | Grade 8
So, ∠1 = ∠2.
Thus, by the AAS congruence condition, ∆BAD ≅ ∆DCB.
Therefore, AD = CB, and DC = BA, since these are corresponding sides of congruent triangles.
Is it wrong to write ∆BAD ≅ ∆CDB? Why?
Thus, we have established that if all the angles of a quadrilateral are right angles, then the opposite sides have equal lengths. Therefore, the quadrilateral is a rectangle. Thus, a rectangle can simply be defined as follows —
Rectangle: A rectangle is a quadrilateral in which the angles are all 90°.
Let us list the properties of a rectangle.
Property 1: All the angles of a rectangle are 90°.
Property 2: The opposite sides of a rectangle are equal.
Are the opposite sides of a rectangle parallel?
They definitely seem so. This fact can be justified using one of the transversal properties.
Notice that AB acts as a transversal to AD and BC, and that ∠A + ∠B = 90° + 90° = 180°.
When the sum of the internal angles on the same side of the transversal is 180°, the lines are parallel. We can use this fact to conclude that the lines AD and BC are parallel, which we represent as AD || BC.
Can you similarly show that AB is parallel to DC (AB||DC)?
Property 3: The opposite sides of a rectangle are parallel to each other.
Property 4: The diagonals of a rectangle are of equal length and they bisect each other.
A Special Rectangle
In the quadrilaterals below, are there any non-rectangles?
(i) (ii) (iii) (iv)
Reprint 2026-27
Quadrilaterals
All these quadrilaterals are rectangles, including (iv). Quadrilateral (iv) is a rectangle because all its angles are 90°. However, it is a special kind of rectangle with all sides of equal length. We know that this quadrilateral is also called a square.
Square: A square is a quadrilateral in which all the angles are equal to 90°, and all the sides are of equal length.
Thus, every square is also a rectangle, but clearly every rectangle is not a square.
and I am a
Malayali.
Wait, which one of them are you — an
Indian or a Malayali?
How can you be both?
This relation can be pictorially represented using a Venn diagram.
We have seen these diagrams before. In a Venn diagram, a set of objects is represented as points inside a closed curve. Typically, these closed curves are ovals or circles.
For example, the set of all squares is represented as
Each point in the region represents a square, thereby covering all the possible squares.
Since every square is a rectangle, the Venn diagram representation of these two sets would be as follows —
Rectangle
Reprint 2026-27
Ganita Prakash | Grade 8
Let us consider the Carpenter’s Problem again. If the wooden strips have to be placed such that the thread passing through their endpoints forms a square, what must be done?
As in the previous case, let us try to construct a square, one of whose diagonals is of length 8 cm.
While solving the Carpenter’s Problem for the case of a rectangle, we have seen that to get a quadrilateral with all angles 90° (and opposite sides of equal length), the diagonals have to be drawn such that — (i) they are of equal lengths, and (ii) they bisect each other.
What more needs to be done to get equal sidelengths as well? Can this be achieved by properly choosing the angle between the diagonals?
See if you can reason and/or experiment to figure this out!
Deduction 5 — What should be the angle formed by the diagonals?
The angle between the diagonals can be found using the notion of congruence!
Suppose we join the equal diagonals such that they bisect each other and result in a square. Let us label the square ABCD.
To find the angle formed by the diagonals, what are the two triangles we should consider for congruence?
By the SSS condition for congruence,
∆BOA ≅ ∆BOC
Can this be used to find the angles ∠BOA and ∠BOC formed by the diagonals?
Since these angles are corresponding parts of congruent triangles, they are equal. Further, these angles together form a straight angle. So
∠BOA + ∠BOC = 180°. Thus, these angles have to be 90° each.
Common Side
Reprint 2026-27
Quadrilaterals
This shows that the diagonals of a square bisect each other at right angles. This means that the diagonals have to be drawn such that they are of equal lengths and bisect each other at right angles. Since the endpoints of the diagonals uniquely determine the vertices of a quadrilateral, we will get a square when the diagonals are joined this way.
Using this fact, construct a square with a diagonal of length 8 cm.
Properties of a Square
Since a square is a special type of rectangle, all the properties of a rectangle hold true for a square.
Verify if this is true by going through geometric reasoning in Deduction
1 and Deduction 2, and see if they apply to a square as well.
Property 1: All the sides of a square are equal to each other.
Property 2: The opposite sides of a square are parallel to each other.
Property 3: The angles of a square are all 90°.
Property 4: The diagonals of a square are of equal length and they bisect each other at 90°.
There is one more special property of a square.
What are the measures of ∠1, ∠2, ∠3, and ∠4? See if you can reason and/or experiment to figure this out!
In ∆ADC, we have,
∠1 + ∠3 + 90 = 180
Since AD = DC, we have ∠1 = ∠3.
Thus, ∠1 = ∠3 = 45°.
Similarly, find ∠2 and ∠4.
Thus, we have another property of a square —
Property 5: The diagonals of a square divide the angles of the square into equal halves. This can also be expressed as — The diagonals of a square bisect the angles of the square.
Reprint 2026-27
Ganita Prakash | Grade 8
Figure it Out
1. Find all the other angles inside the following rectangles.
2. Draw a quadrilateral whose diagonals have equal lengths of 8 cm that bisect each other, and intersect at an angle of (i) 30° (ii) 40° (iii) 90° (iv) 140°
3. Consider a circle with centre O. Line segments PL and AM are two perpendicular diameters of the circle. What is the figure APML?
Reason and/or experiment to figure this out.
4. We have seen how to get 90° using paper folding. Now, suppose we do not have any paper but two sticks of equal length, and a thread. How do we make an exact 90° using these?
5. We saw that one of the properties of a rectangle is that its opposite sides are parallel. Can this be chosen as a definition of a rectangle?
In other words, is every quadrilateral that has opposite sides parallel and equal, a rectangle?
4.2 Angles in a Quadrilateral
Is it possible to construct a quadrilateral with three angles equal to 90° and the fourth angle not equal to 90°?
You might have observed through constructions that this may not be possible.
But why not?
This is due to a general property of quadrilaterals related to their
We have seen that the sum of the angles of a triangle is 180°. There is a similar regularity in the sum of the angles of a quadrilateral.
(i) (ii) S
Reprint 2026-27
Quadrilaterals
Consider a quadrilateral SOME.
Draw a diagonal SM. We get two triangles ∆SEM and ∆SOM.
In ∆SEM, we have ∠1 + ∠2 + ∠3 = 180°.
And in ∆SOM, ∠4 + ∠5 + ∠6 = 180°.
What do we get when we add all six
We will have
∠1+ ∠2 + ∠3 + ∠4 + ∠5 + ∠6 = 180° + 180°
Or, (∠1+ ∠4) + (∠3 + ∠6) +∠2 + ∠5 = 360°.
Since (∠1 + ∠4), (∠3 + ∠6), ∠2 and ∠5 are the angles of this quadrilateral, we have the following result —
The sum of all angles in any quadrilateral is 360°.
This explains why it is impossible for a quadrilateral to have three right angles, with the fourth angle not right angle.
4.3 More Quadrilaterals with Parallel Opposite
Rectangles (and therefore squares) have parallel opposite sides.
Are there quadrilaterals that have parallel opposite sides that are not rectangles?
Let us try constructing one.
This can be easily done by drawing two pairs of parallel lines, ensuring that they do not meet at right angles.
Construct such a figure by recalling how parallel lines can be constructed using a ruler and a set-square, or a compass and a ruler.
Observe the quadrilateral ABCD. It has parallel opposite sides but is not a rectangle.
Thus, a larger set of quadrilaterals exists in which the opposite sides are parallel. Such quadrilaterals are called parallelograms.
Reprint 2026-27
Ganita Prakash | Grade 8
Is a rectangle a parallelogram?
A rectangle has opposite sides parallel. So, it satisfies the parallelogram’s definition. Hence, it is indeed a parallelogram. More specifically, a rectangle is a special kind of parallelogram with all its angles equal to 90°.
Let us represent this relation using a Venn diagram.
To understand the relations between the sides and the angles of a parallelogram, let us construct the following figure.
Rectangle
Parallelogram
Draw a parallelogram with adjacent sides of lengths 4 cm and 5 cm, and an angle of 30° between them. 30°
4 cm A B
ABCD is the required parallelogram.
What are the remaining angles of the parallelogram? What are the lengths of the remaining sides? See if you can reason out and/or experiment to figure these out.
Step 1: Draw line segments AB = 4 cm and AD = 5 cm with an angle of
30° between them.
4 cm A B
Step 2: Draw a line parallel to AB through the point D, and a line parallel to AD through B. Mark the point at which these lines intersect
Reprint 2026-27
Quadrilaterals
Deduction 6 — What can we say about the angles of a parallelogram?
In the parallelogram ABCD, AB||CD, and AD is a transversal to them.
∠A + ∠D = 180° (sum of the internal angles on the same side of a transversal).
Therefore,
∠D = 180 – ∠A = 180 – 30 = 150°.
Similarly, AD||BC, and AB and
CD are transversals to them.
So, ∠A + ∠B = 180°.
So, ∠C + ∠D = 180°.
Using these equations, we get ∠B = 150° and ∠C = 30°.
We see that in this parallelogram, the adjacent pairs of angles add up to 180° and opposite pairs of angles are equal.
∠A + ∠B = 180°, ∠A + ∠D = 180°, ∠C + ∠D = 180°, and ∠B + ∠C = 180°.
∠A = ∠C, and ∠B = ∠D.
Since the adjacent angles are the interior angles on the same side of a transversal to a pair of parallel lines, they must add up to 180°.
What about the opposite angles? Will they be equal in all parallelograms?
If yes, how can we be sure?
Let us take one of the angles to be x.
What are the other angles?
Since ∠P + ∠R = 180°,
∠R = 180 – ∠P = 180 – x.
Similarly, since ∠A + ∠R = 180°,
∠A = 180 – ∠R = 180 – (180 – x) = 180 – 180 + x = x.
Thus, ∠P = ∠A = x.
Similarly, we can deduce that ∠ R = ∠E = 180 – x.
Therefore, this shows that the opposite angles of a parallelogram are always equal.
Deduction 7 — What can we say about the sides of a parallelogram?
By looking at a parallelogram, it appears that the opposite sides are
Can we again use congruence to show this? Which two triangles can be considered for this?
4 cm A B
Reprint 2026-27
Ganita Prakash | Grade 8
In ∆ABD and ∆CDB, the angles marked with a single arc are equal as they are the opposite angles of a parallelogram.
Since AD||BC, and BD is a transversal to it, the angles marked with double arcs are equal as they are alternate
So, by the AAS condition, the triangles are congruent, that is, ∆ABD ≅ ∆CDB.
Therefore, AD = CB, and AB = CD.
Thus, the opposite sides of a parallelogram are equal.
Is it wrong to write ∆ABD ≅ ∆CBD? Why?
From these deductions we can find the remaining sides and angles of the parallelogram.
4 cm A B
Let us list the properties of a parallelogram.
Property 1: The opposite sides of a parallelogram are equal.
Property 2: The opposite sides of a parallelogram are parallel.
Property 3: In a parallelogram, the adjacent angles add up to 180°, and the opposite angles are equal.
Are the diagonals of a parallelogram always equal? Check with the parallelogram that you have constructed.
We see that the diagonals of a parallelogram need not be equal.
Do they bisect each other (do they intersect at their midpoints)? Reason and/or experiment to figure this out.
Deduction 8 — What is the point of intersection of the two diagonals in a parallelogram?
As in the case of a rectangle, we can find out if the diagonals bisect each other by examining the congruence of ∆AOE and ∆YOS in the parallelogram EASY.
Reprint 2026-27
Quadrilaterals
AE = YS (as they are the opposite sides of the parallelogram)
The angles marked using a single arc are equal, and so are the angles marked using a double arc, since they are alternate angles of parallel lines.
Thus, by the ASA condition, the triangles are congruent, that is,
∆AOE ≅ ∆YOS.
Therefore, OA = OY, and OE = OS, since they are corresponding parts of congruent triangles.
Thus, O is the midpoint of both diagonals.
Is it wrong to write ∆AOE ≅ ∆SOY? Why?
Property 4: The diagonals of a parallelogram bisect each other.
Do the diagonals of a parallelogram intersect at a particular angle?
4.4 Quadrilaterals with Equal Sidelengths
Are squares the only quadrilaterals that have equal sidelengths? Let us explore this question through construction.
Draw two equal sides AD and AB, that are not perpendicular to each other.
Can we complete this quadrilateral so that all its sides are of the same
Mark a point C whose distance from
B and D is equal to AB (or AD). To do this, measure AB using a compass. Keeping this length as the radius, cut arcs from
B and D.
Now we have a quadrilateral with equal sidelengths and one of its angles
50°. Note that we could have constructed such a quadrilateral by taking any angle less than 180° (in place of 50°).
A quadrilateral in which all the sides have the same length is a rhombus.
Reprint 2026-27
Ganita Prakash | Grade 8
What are the other angles of the rhombus ABCD that we have constructed? Reason and/or experiment to fig
