On 28 February, the school hosted a science fair to celebrate
National Science Day. At the entry gate, siblings Ashwin and
Keerthi were greeted with a white sheet of paper. They were curious to know why a white sheet of paper was given to them!
A few steps ahead, there was a volunteer spraying a liquid on these sheets of paper. The siblings also got their white sheets sprayed. To their surprise, the words ‘Welcome to the Wonderful
World of Science’ appeared on the papers the moment the liquid was sprayed (Fig. 2.1). They were excited and eager to know how this happened and the reason behind it.
Their curiosity was partly satisfied at the ‘Colourful World of Substances’ stall. They saw many activities showing colour changes on mixing diff erent substances. They decided to explore these changes further. Let us join them on this learning adventure.
Fig. 2.1: Scene of a science fair
Exploring
Substances: Acidic,
Basic, and Neutral
Reprint 2026-27
Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
2.1 Nature — Our Science Laboratory 2.1 Nature — Our Science Laboratory 2.1 Nature — Our Science Laboratory 2.1 Nature — Our Science Laboratory 2.1 Nature — Our Science Laboratory 2.1 Nature — Our Science Laboratory 2.1 Nature — Our Science Laboratory 2.1 Nature — Our Science Laboratory 2.1 Nature — Our Science Laboratory 2.1 Nature — Our Science Laboratory 2.1 Nature — Our Science Laboratory 2.1 Nature — Our Science Laboratory 2.1 Nature — Our Science Laboratory
2.1.1 Litmus as an indicator
Activity 2.1: Let us explore
 Collect samples of lemon juice, soap solution, amla juice, tamarind water, vinegar, baking soda solution, lime water, tap water, washing powder solution, sugar solution, and salt solution.
Fig. 2.2(a): Colour change in blue litmus paper
Fig. 2.2(b): Colour change in red litmus paper
 Take a strip of blue litmus paper and cut it into small pieces.
 Spread these pieces on a clean and dry white tile.
 Using a dropper, put one drop of each of the samples, one-by-one, on these litmus paper pieces, as shown in Fig. 2.2a.
 Do you observe any change in the colour of the blue litmus pieces?
 Record your observations in Table 2.1.
 Repeat the same activity with pieces of red litmus paper as shown in
Fig. 2.2b and record your observations in Table 2.1.
How to prepare lime water?
Do not confuse lime water with the word lime, which is a fruit similar to lemon.
Lime water (solution of calcium hydroxide in water) can be easily prepared by mixing lime (chuna, i.e. calcium oxide) in water and leaving it undisturbed for some time, say an hour. Filter the liquid into another container and use it as lime water.
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Substances: Acidic, Basic, and Neutral
Name of the sample S.No.
Colour of blue litmus paper after putting a drop of
Colour of red litmus paper after putting a drop of
Table 2.1: Testing the nature of samples with blue and red litmus papers Table 2.1: Testing the nature of samples with blue and red litmus papers
Lemon juice 1.
2. Soap solution
3. Amla juice
4. Tamarind water
6. Baking soda solution
8. Tap water
10. Sugar solution
5. Vinegar
7. Lime water
9. Washing powder solution
11. Salt solution
12. Any other
Now, let us analyse Table 2.1 and sort the samples into three groups as follows —
 Group A with samples that turn the blue litmus paper to red.
 Group B with samples that turn the red litmus paper to blue.
 Group C with samples that do not affect either of the two litmus papers.
Record the data in Table 2.2.
Group A Group B Group C
Table 2.2: Grouping of samples tested in Table 2.1 Table 2.2: Grouping of samples tested in Table 2.1
Reprint 2026-27
Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
Let us find out!
Litmus is a natural substance obtained from lichens. It is available both as a solution and in the form of paper strips, known as litmus paper. The litmus paper is available in two colours—blue and red, as shown in Fig. 2.3.
Substances that turn blue litmus paper to red are acidic in nature, while those that turn red litmus paper to blue are basic in nature. Since litmus shows diff erent colours in acidic and basic solutions, it is called an acid-base indicator.
Some other substances, both natural and synthetic, can also be used as indicators. Synthetic indicators are made in laboratories, and you will learn more about them in higher
HOLISTIC LENS
Lichens are formed by the association of two living organisms, a fungus and an alga. They grow on rocks and trees in regions that have abundant rainfall and clean air. Do you fi nd lichens on trees in your neighbourhood?
Now, let us classify the substances sorted in Group A, Group B, and Group C in Table 2.2.
 The substances in Group A, such as lemon juice, amla juice, tamarind water, and vinegar turned the blue litmus paper to red, implying that these substances are acidic in nature.
 The substances in Group B, such as soap solution, baking soda solution, lime water, and washing powder solution turned the red litmus paper to blue. Hence, these substances are basic in nature.
 The substances in Group C, such as tap water, sugar solution, and salt solution, did not change the colour of either litmus paper. Can you predict their nature?
These substances are said to be neutral because they are neither acidic nor basic.
I am curious to know — what are these red and blue litmus paper strips made of?
Why do they change colour when drops of some samples are put on them?
Fig. 2.3: Blue and red litmus paper strips
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Substances: Acidic, Basic, and Neutral
Now, I can check the nature of fl oor cleaning liquid using an indicator!
Activity 2.2: Let us relate and explore
Are all the substances in Group A of Table 2.2 edible? Have you ever tasted these edible substances? Can you recall their taste?
You will fi nd that all these substances taste sour. Thus, we can say that substances that taste sour tend to contain acids and are acidic in nature.
Caution — Do not taste anything until asked to do so. Do not taste any unknown substance.
Some common edible substances and the names of the most common acids present in them are given in Fig. 2.4.
Tartaric acid
Ascorbic acid (Vitamin C)
and Citric acid
Citric acid and Oxalic acid
Citric acid
Fig. 2.4: The most common acids present in some edible substances
Find out and write the names of the most common acids present in the following substances —
Lemon________, Curd________, Tamarind________, Vinegar________.
Now, let us take one of the substances — baking soda solution — from Group B. Rub the baking soda solution between your fi ngers. What do you observe?
It feels soapy or slippery. Basic substances are generally slippery to touch.
Also, bases generally taste bitter, but everything that tastes bitter may not contain a base. For example, bitter gourd (karela) possesses a bitter taste but is not basic in nature.
If litmus is not available, are there some other natural substances that can serve as acid-base indicators?
Reprint 2026-27
Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
2.1.2 Red rose as an indicator
You might have observed many coloured fl owers in your surroundings. Try making your indicators using these flowers.
Activity 2.3: Let us prepare
 Collect some fallen petals of red roses available in your surroundings (Fig. 2.5). It is advised not to pluck fl owers. You may pick petals or flowers fallen on the ground.
 Take a fi stful of the collected petals of red roses and wash them with water.
 Crush the petals using a mortar and pestle.
 Place them in a glass tumbler.
 Pour some hot water into the glass tumbler to ensure that the crushed flower petals are completely immersed.
Caution — Perform this step under the supervision of an adult.
 Cover the glass tumbler with a lid. Wait for 5 – 10 minutes till the water becomes coloured (Fig. 2.6), and filter it.
 The fi ltrate (liquid after fi ltration) is the required fl ower extract (Fig. 2.7) to be used as an acid-base indicator.
Fig. 2.7: Test tube containing the red rose extract
Test tube
Test tube stand
Red rose extract
Activity 2.4: Let us find out
 Place 10 – 20 drops of the prepared red rose extract in each of two small transparent bottles or test tubes. Mark them
A and B.
Fig. 2.6: Red rose petals immersed in hot water
Fig. 2.5: Red roses
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Substances: Acidic, Basic, and Neutral
Fig. 2.8: The changes in colour of the red rose extract on adding lemon juice (A) and soap solution (B)
Name of the sample Nature of the substance
Lemon juice
Soap solution
Amla juice
The colour of the red rose extract after adding the
Table 2.3: Testing the nature of samples with the red rose extract
Discuss your observations with your classmates.
 Are the samples that change the colour of the flower extract to a shade of red the same as those that changed the colour of blue litmus paper to red? (Group A, Table 2.2)
 Are the samples that change the colour of the flower extract to a shade of green the same as those that changed the colour of red litmus paper to blue? (Group B, Table 2.2)
 Are the samples that do not change the colour of the fl ower extract the same as those that did not change the colour of red and blue litmus papers? (Group C, Table 2.2)
From the above activity, we can conclude that the red rose extract can also be used to test the nature of the substances;
hence, it is another example of an acid-base indicator. We can conclude that the red rose extract seems to give red colour in an acidic solution and green colour in a basic solution.
Can you now fill in the nature of the substances in Table 2.3?
 Add 20 – 30 drops of lemon juice in test tube A and 20 – 30 drops of soap solution in test tube B with the help of droppers.
 Observe and record any colour changes (Fig. 2.8) to the extract in Table 2.3.
 Repeat the same with the other samples used in
Activity 2.1 and record your observations in Table 2.3.
Reprint 2026-27
Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
We are sure that you will be excited about the above results.
You may repeat the process of preparing the extract and testing substances with some vegetables, fruits, or fl owers, such as beetroot, purple cabbage, turmeric, Indian blackberry (jamun), and red hibiscus (gudhal) fl ower. They can also act as acid-base indicators.
FASCINATING FACTS
Hydrangea is a plant that grows in cooler climates in the Himalayan region and the
North-eastern states. It gives fl owers of diff erent colours, depending on the nature of the soil. Acidic soil produces blue- coloured fl owers, whereas in basic soil, the fl owers are pink or red. Can gardeners alter the colour of hydrangea fl owers by adjusting the acidic or basic nature of the soil?
Hydrangea fl owers
2.1.3 Turmeric as an indicator
We have used blue and red litmus paper strips in Activity 2.1. Can you also make paper strips with some other natural indicators?
Find out by performing the following activity.
Activity 2.5: Let us prepare
 Take a spoonful of turmeric (haldi) in a petri dish or container and add a little water to make a paste (Fig. 2.9a). You may also grind a piece of fresh turmeric.
 Carefully dip a piece of fi lter paper in the turmeric paste until it gets yellow colour.
 Take it out and allow it to dry.
 Cut this yellow paper into thin strips, which are used as
‘turmeric paper’ (Fig. 2.9b).
Caution — Perform this step under the supervision of an adult.
(a) Turmeric paste (b) Turmeric paper strips
Fig. 2.9: Preparing turmeric paper pink or red. Can gardeners alter the colour of hydrangea fl owers by
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Substances: Acidic, Basic, and Neutral
 Using a dropper, put a drop of each of the samples used in
Activity 2.1, one by one, on separate pieces of turmeric paper.
 Record your observations in Table 2.4.
Table 2.4: Testing the nature of samples with turmeric paper
Name of the sample The colour of the turmeric paper after putting a drop of the sample
Lemon juice
Soap solution
Amla juice
What did you observe?
 Do all samples change the colour of the turmeric paper?
 Group the samples which do not change the colour of the turmeric paper.
Compare them with the samples in Group A, Group B, and Group C in Table 2.2.
Can turmeric paper be used as an indicator for acidic substances? Discuss your observations with your classmates.
Based on the observations, we can conclude that turmeric paper can be used to test basic substances. However, it cannot diff erentiate between acidic and neutral substances.
FASCINATING FACTS
Why is turmeric known as a ‘Golden’ spice?
Turmeric is a member of the ginger family, which is grown in India and other countries.
A common spice in daily households, it is being researched for benefi ts beyond the taste and colour it provides to the food! In the Ayurvedic system of medicine, turmeric is considered to have numerous health benefi ts, and is commonly used in several traditional home remedies.
Turmeric (Haldi)
system of medicine, turmeric is considered to have numerous health benefi ts, and is commonly used in several traditional home remedies.
I got a curry stain on my white shirt and on applying soap it changed its colour! Wow! Now I know the reason.
Reprint 2026-27
Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
Ashwin created a greeting card to pay gratitude to his teacher on the day of Guru Purnima. He applied turmeric paste on white paper and dried it. He wrote his wishes in the teacher's mother tongue (Odia language) on the dried paper using one of the solutions tested in Table 2.4. Which solution can be used to write the message? His teacher applauded his creative use of this concept.
Are there any substances whose odours change on adding acidic or basic substances?
I re spect my teacher as she nurtured curiosity within me and bestowed upon me the gift of learning. I bow my head in gratitude to her!
There are some substances whose odours change in an acidic or basic medium. These are called olfactory indicators.
Let us explore more!
Activity 2.6: Let us investigate
 Take some fi nely chopped onions in a container, along with some strips of clean cotton cloth or filter paper.
 Tightly close the container and leave it overnight.
 Take two of the cotton cloth or fi lter paper strips from the container and check their odour.
 Keep them on a clean surface and put a few drops of tamarind water on one strip and a few drops of baking soda solution on the other. Allow the drops to spread on the strips.
 Check the odour again.
 Do you notice any change in the odour of the onion strips before and after putting tamarind water and baking soda solution on them?
 Note your observations.
 Similarly, test the change in the odour with other acidic and basic substances and record your observations.
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Substances: Acidic, Basic, and Neutral
Fig. 2.10(a): The colour of the solution on adding blue litmus solution
Fig. 2.10(a): The colour of the
Fig. 2.10(b): The colour of the solution on adding lime water
KNOW A SCIENTIST
Acharya Prafulla Chandra Ray (P.C. Ray) is known as the
‘Father of Modern Indian Chemistry’. He earned a doctorate in chemistry from the United Kingdom and returned to
India. He contributed towards advancing scientific research in India. He also established India’s fi rst pharmaceutical company (a company in the fi eld of medicines) in 1901. He was a person rooted in Indian culture and knowledge traditions.
Through his writings on the history of chemistry in India, he highlighted the achievements and expertise of ancient
Indian scientists to the modern world. Ray, a social reformer, also advocated the use of the mother tongue as a medium of instruction in educational institutions.
Through his writings on the history of also advocated the use of the mother tongue as a medium of
2.2 What Happens When Acidic Substances
Mix with Basic Substances?
Let us investigate by performing the following experiment.
Activity 2.7: Let us experiment
 Take one drop of lemon juice in a test tube and add around twenty drops of water to it. Observe the colour.
 Add a drop of blue litmus solution to it.
 Do you observe any colour change (Fig. 2.10a)?
 Slowly add drops of lime water to this test tube with the help of a dropper and swirl it well.
 What do you observe? Is there any change in the colour of the solution?
 A stage comes when the colour of the solution changes from red to blue (Fig. 2.10b).
 Again, add one drop of lemon juice to the above solution.
Can you predict why there is a change in colour?
Reprint 2026-27
Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
Initially, when a drop of blue litmus solution is added to the lemon juice solution, the colour of the solution turns red. When lime water is added to this test tube, the colour of the solution eventually changes from red to blue. This shows that the solution in the test tube is no longer acidic. Lime water has neutralised the effect of the acid.
When the solution of an acid is mixed with the solution of a base in sufficient quantity, we fi nd that the resulting solution is neither acidic nor basic. Such reactions are called neutralisation reactions. In a neutralisation reaction, salt and water are formed with the evolution (i.e., release) of heat.
Acid + Base → Salt + Water + Heat
There are many examples in everyday life where you can observe the use of neutralisation processes.
Let us find out!
2.3 Neutralisation in Daily Life 2.3 Neutralisation in Daily Life 2.3 Neutralisation in Daily Life 2.3 Neutralisation in Daily Life 2.3 Neutralisation in Daily Life 2.3 Neutralisation in Daily Life 2.3 Neutralisation in Daily Life 2.3 Neutralisation in Daily Life 2.3 Neutralisation in Daily Life 2.3 Neutralisation in Daily Life 2.3 Neutralisation in Daily Life 2.3 Neutralisation in Daily Life 2.3 Neutralisation in Daily Life 2.3 Neutralisation in Daily Life
Situation 1: Keerthi was observing a butterfl y in the garden with her hand resting on a tree trunk.
Suddenly, a red ant bit her, leaving her skin red with stinging pa
