You have already seen the map of India in the previous classes. Now you closely examine the map of India (Figure 1.1).
Mark the southernmost and northernmost latitudes and the easternmost and westernmost longitudes.
The mainland of India, extends from
Kashmir in the north to Kanniyakumari in the south and Arunachal Pradesh in the east to
Gujarat in the west. India’s territorial limit further extends towards the sea upto 12 nautical miles (about 21.9 km) from the coast.
(See the box for conversion).
Statute mile = 63,360 inches
Nautical mile = 72,960 inches
1 Statute mile = about 1.6 km (1.584 km)
1 Nautical mile = about 1.8 km (1.852 km)
Our southern boundary extends upto
6°45' N latitude in the Bay of Bengal. Let us try to analyse the implications of having such a vast longitudinal and latitudinal extent.
If you work out the latitudinal and longitudinal extent of India, they are roughly about 30 degrees, whereas the actual distance measured from north to south extremity is
3,214 km, and that from east to west is only
2,933 km. What is the reason for this difference? Consult Chapter 3 on the topic
Latitude, Longitude and Time in the book
Practical Work in Geography – Part I (NCERT,
2006) to find out.
This difference is based on the fact that the distance between two longitudes decreases towards the poles whereas the distance between two latitudes remains the same everywhere. Find out the distance between two latitudes?
From the values of latitude, it is understood that the southern part of the country lies within the tropics and the northern part lies in the sub-tropical zone or the warm temperate zone. This location is responsible for large variations in land forms, climate, soil types and natural vegetation in the country.
Now, let us observe the longitudinal extent and its implications on the Indian people. From the values of longitude, it is quite discernible that there is a variation of nearly 30 degrees, which causes a time difference of nearly two hours between the easternmost and the westernmost parts of our country. You are familiar with the concept of Indian Standard
Time (IST). What is the use of the standard meridian? While the sun rises in the northeastern states about two hours earlier as compared to Jaisalmer, the watches in
Dibrugarh, Imphal in the east and Jaisalmer,
Bhopal or Chennai in the other parts of India show the same time. Why does this happen?
IIIIIN N N N ND D D D DIIIIIA A A A A – L – L – L – L – LOC OC OC OC OCA A A A ATI TI TI TI TIO O O O ON N N N N
C H A P T E R
There is a general understanding among the countries of the world to select the standard meridian in multiples of 7°30' of longitude. That is why 82°30' E has been selected as the
‘standard meridian’ of India. Indian Standard Time is ahead of Greenwich Mean Time by
5 hours and 30 minutes.
There are some countries where there are more than one standard meridian due to their vast east-to-west extent. For example, the USA has seven time zones.
