3 INDIA – LOCATION
Figure 1.1 : India : Administrative Divisions
4 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Figure 1.2 : Location of India in the Eastern World
5 INDIA – LOCATION
Name a few places in India through which the standard meridian passes?
India with its area of 3.28 million sq. km accounts for 2.4 per cent of the world’s land surface area and stands as the seventh largest country in the world. Find out the names of the countries which are larger than
The size of India has endowed her with great physical diversity. Thus, you may appreciate the presence of lofty mountains in the north;
large rivers such as Ganga, Brahmaputra,
Mahanadi, Krishna, Godavari and Kaveri;
green forested hills in northeast and south
India; and the vast sandy expanse of
Marusthali. You may further appreciate that bounded by the Himalayas in the north,
Hindukush and Sulaiman ranges in the north- west, Purvachal hills in the north-east and by the large expanse of the Indian ocean in the south, it forms a great geographic entity known as the Indian subcontinent. It includes the countries — Pakistan, Nepal, Bhutan,
Bangladesh and India. The Himalayas, together with other ranges, have acted as a formidable physical barrier in the past. Except for a few mountain passes such as the Khyber, the Bolan, the Shipkila, the Nathula, the
Bomdila, etc. it was difficult to cross it. It has contributed towards the evolving of a unique regional identity of the Indian subcontinent.
By referring to the physical map of India you can now describe the physical variations which you would come across while travelling from Kashmir to Kanniyakumari and from
Jaisalmer in Rajasthan to Imphal in Manipur.
Peninsular part of India extends towards the Indian Ocean. This has provided the country with a coastline of 6,100 km in the mainland and 7,517 km in the entire geographical coast of the mainland plus the island groups Andaman and Nicobar located in the Bay of Bengal and the Lakshadweep in the Arabian Sea. Thus India, as a country, is a physically diverse land providing occurrence of varied resources.
INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS
Examine the location map of India (Figure 1.2).
You will notice that India is located in the south-central part of the continent of Asia, bordering the Indian ocean and its two arms extending in the form of Bay of Bengal and the
Arabian Sea. This maritime location of
Peninsular India has provided links to its neighbouring regions through the sea and air
Prepare a list of India’s neighbouring countries by consulting the map.
Sri Lanka and Maldives are the two island countries located in the Indian Ocean, which are our neighbours. Sri Lanka is separated from
India by the Gulf of Mannar and Palk Strait.
Differentiate between a Gulf and a Strait.
Do you think that physical barrier is a hindrance in interaction with our neighbouring countries in modern times? Give some examples how we have overcome these difficulties in the present day.
Do you Remember?
School Bhuvan NCER T is a portal providing map-based learning to bring awareness among the students about country’s natural resources, environment and their role in sustainable development. It is an initiative of Bhuvan-NRSC/ISRO, based on NCER T syllabus.
You can explore various maps of India on http://bhuvan-app1.nrsc.gov.in/ mhrd_ncert/
Activity: Observe the map of India on an atlas/School Bhuvan NCERT portal and collect information about states/districts/villages located near the international border of India.
6 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
1. Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below.
(i) Which one of the following latitudinal extent is relevant for the extent of
India’s area?
(a) 8°41'N - 35°7'N (c) 8°4'N - 35°6'N (b) 8°4'N - 37°6'N (d) 6°45'N - 37°6'N (ii) Which one of the following countries shares the longest land frontier with (a) Bangladesh (c) Pakistan (b) China (d) Myanmar (iii) Which one of the following countries is larger in area than India?
(a) China (c) France (b) Egypt (d) Iran (iv) Which one of the following longitudes is the standard meridian for India?
(a) 69°30'E (c) 75°30'E (b) 82°30'E (d) 90°30'E
2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) Does India need to have more than one standard time? If yes, why do you think so?
(ii) What are the implications of India having a long coastline?
(iii) How is the latitudinal spread of India advantageous to her?
(iv) While the sun rises earlier in the east, say Nagaland and also sets earlier, how do the watches at Kohima and New Delhi show the same time?
Project/Activity
Activity based on Map of India/Atlas/Census (Teachers may help in the exercises by explaining and getting it done by the students).
(i) On a graph paper, plot the number of districts in Madhya Pradesh,
Karnataka, Meghalaya, Goa, Kerala, Haryana. Do the number of districts have some relationship with the area of the state?
(ii) Which state amongst Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Gujarat, Arunachal
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Tripura and Rajasthan is the most thickly populated and which one is the least densely populated?
(iii) Identify the states with coastal boundaries.
(iv) Arrange the states from west to east which have only land boundary.
(v) List the Union Territories which have coastal location.
(vi) How do you explain the variation in the area and population of NCT Delhi and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands?
(vii) On a graph paper, draw a bar diagram to show the area and population of all the Union Territories.
EXERCISES
PHYSIOGRAPHY
This unit deals with
• Structure and Relief; physiographic divisions
• Drainage systems: concept of water sheds — the Himalayan and the Peninsular
Do you know that our earth also has a history. The earth and its landforms that we see today have evolved over a very long time. Current estimation shows that the earth is approximately 4600 million years old. Over these long years, it has undergone many changes brought about primarily by the endogenic and exogenic forces. These forces have played a significant role in giving shape to various surface and subsurface features of the earth. You have already studied about the Plate Tectonics and the movement of the Earth’s plates in the book Fundamentals of Physical Geography (NCERT, 2024). Do you know that the Indian plate was to the south of the equator millions of years ago? Do you also know that it was much larger in size and the Australian plate was a part of it? Over millions of years, this plate broke into many parts and the Australian plate moved towards the southeastern direction and the
Indian plate to the north. Can you map different phases in the movement of the
Indian plate? This northward movement of the Indian plate is still continuing and it has significant consequences on the physical environment of the Indian subcontinent. Can you name some important consequences of the northward movement of the Indian plate?
It is primarily through the interplay of these endogenic and exogenic forces and lateral movements of the plates that the present geological structure and geomorphologic processes active in the Indian subcontinent came into existence. Based on the variations in its geological structure and formations, India can be divided into three geological divisions. These geological regions broadly follow the physical features:
(i) The Penisular Block (ii) The Himalayas and other Peninuslar
Mountains (iii) Indo-Ganga-Brahmaputra Plain.
THE PENINSULAR BLOCK
The northern boundary of the Peninsular
Block may be taken as an irregular line running from Kachchh along the western flank of the Aravali Range near Delhi and then roughly parallel to the Yamuna and the Ganga as far as the Rajmahal Hills and the Ganga delta. Apart from these, the Karbi Anglong and the Meghalaya
Plateau in the northeast and Rajasthan in the west are also extensions of this block. The northeastern parts are separated by the Malda fault in West
Bengal from the Chotanagpur plateau. In
Rajasthan, the desert and other desert– like features overlay this block.
The Peninsula is formed essentially by a great complex of very ancient gneisses and granites, which constitutes a major part of it. Since the Cambrian period, the
Peninsula has been standing like a rigid block with the exception of some of its western coast which is submerged beneath the sea and some other parts changed due to tectonic activity without affecting the original basement. As a part of the Indo-Australian Plate, it has been subjected to various vertical movements and block faulting. The rift valleys of the Narmada, the
Tapi and the Mahanadi and the Satpura block
STRUCTURE AND PHYSIOGRAPHY
C H A P T E R
