18 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Figure 3.2 : Major Rivers of India
AFGHANISTAN
19 DRAINAGE SYSTEM is called a drainage basin. The boundary line separating one drainage basin from the other is known as the watershed. The catchments of large rivers are called river basins while those of small rivulets and rills are often referred to as watersheds. There is, however, a slight difference between a river basin and a watershed. Watersheds are small in area while the basins cover larger areas.
River basins and watersheds are marked by unity. What happens in one part of the basin or watershed directly affects the other parts and the unit as a whole. That is why, they are accepted as the most appropriate micro, meso or macro planning regions.
Indian drainage system may be divided on various bases. On the basis of discharge of water (orientations to the sea), it may be grouped into:
(i) the Arabian Sea drainage; and (ii) the Bay of
Bengal drainage. They are separated from each other through the Delhi ridge, the Aravalis and the Sahyadris (water divide is shown by a line in Figure 3.1). Nearly 77 per cent of the drainage area consisting of the Ganga, the Brahmaputra, the Mahanadi, the Krishna, etc. is oriented towards the Bay of Bengal while 23 per cent comprising the Indus, the Narmada, the Tapi, the Mahi and the Periyar systems discharge their waters in the Arabian Sea.
On the basis of the size of the watershed, the drainage basins of India are grouped into three categories: (i) Major river basins with more than 20,000 sq. km of catchment area.
It includes 14 drainage basins such as the
Ganga, the Brahmaputra, the Krishna, the
Tapi, the Narmada, the Mahi, the Pennar, the
Sabarmati, the Barak, etc. (ii) Medium river basins with catchment area between
2,000-20,000 sq. km incorporating 44 river basins such as the Kalindi, the Periyar, the
Meghna, etc. (iii) Minor river basins with catchment area of less than 2,000 sq. km include fairly good number of rivers flowing in the area of low rainfall.
If you look at the Figure 3.2 you can see that many rivers have their sources in the
Himalayas and discharge their waters either in the Bay of Bengal or in the Arabian Sea. Identify these rivers of North India. Large rivers flowing on the Peninsular plateau have their origin in the Western Ghats and discharge their waters in the Bay of Bengal. Identify these rivers of the South India.
The Narmada and Tapi are two large rivers which are exceptions. They along with many small rivers discharge their waters in the
Arabian Sea.
Name these rivers of the western coastal region from the Konkan to the Malabar coast.
On the basis of the mode of origin, nature and characteristics, the Indian drainage may also be classified into the Himalayan drainage and the Peninsular drainage. Although it has the problem of including the Chambal, the
Betwa, the Son, etc. which are much older in age and origin than other rivers that have their origin in the Himalayas, it is the most accepted basis of classification. Hence, this scheme has been followed in this book.
DRAINAGE SYSTEMS OF INDIA
Indian drainage system consists of a large number of small and big rivers. It is the outcome of the evolutionary process of the three major physiographic units and the nature and characteristics of precipitation.
THE HIMALAYAN DRAINAGE
The Himalayan drainage system has evolved through a long geological history. It mainly includes the Ganga, the Indus and the
Brahmaputra river basins. Since these are fed both by melting of snow and precipitation, rivers of this system are perennial. These rivers pass through the giant gorges carved out by the erosional activity carried on simultaneously with the uplift of the Himalayas. Besides deep gorges, these rivers also form V-shaped valleys,
Figure 3.3 : Rapids
20 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT course. While entering the plains, they form depositional features like flat valleys, ox-bow lakes, flood plains, braided channels, and deltas near the river mouth. In the Himalayan reaches, the course of these rivers is highly tortous, but over the plains they display a strong meandering tendency and shift their courses frequently. River Kosi, also know as the ‘sorrow of Bihar’, has been notorious for frequently changing its course. The Kosi brings huge quantity of sediments from its upper reaches and deposits it in the plains. The course gets blocked, and consequently, the river changes its course. Why does the Kosi river bring such huge quantity of sediments from the upper reaches? Do you think that the discharge of the water in the rivers in general and the Kosi in particular, remains the same, or does it fluctuate? When does the river course receive the maximum quantity of water?
What are the positive and negative effects of flooding?
EVOLUTION OF THE HIMALAYAN DRAINAGE
There are difference of opinion about the evolution of the Himalayan rivers. However, geologists believe that a mighty river called
Shiwalik or Indo-Brahma traversed the entire longitudinal extent of the Himalaya from Assam to Punjab and onwards to Sind, and finally discharged into the Gulf of Sind near lower
Punjab during the Miocene period some 5-24 million years ago The remarkable continuity of the Shiwalik and its lacustrine origin and alluvial deposits consisting of sands, silt, clay, boulders and conglomerates support this viewpoint.
It is opined that in due course of time Indo–
Brahma river was dismembered into three main drainage systems: (i) the Indus and its five tributaries in the western part; (ii) the Ganga and its Himalayan tributaries in the central part; and (iii) the stretch of the Brahmaputra in Assam and its Himalayan tributaries in the eastern part. The dismemberment was probably due to the Pleistocene upheaval in the western Himalayas, including the uplift of the Potwar Plateau (Delhi Ridge), which acted as the water divide between the Indus and
Ganga drainage systems. Likewise, the down- thrusting of the Malda gap area between the
Rajmahal hills and the Meghalaya plateau during the mid-pleistocene period, diverted the
Ganga and the Brahmaputra systems to flow towards the Bay of Bengal.
THE RIVER SYSTEMS OF THE
HIMALAYAN DRAINAGE
The Himalayan drainage consists of several river systems but the following are the major river systems:
The Indus System
It is one of the largest river basins of the world, covering an area of 11,65,000 sq. km (in India it is 321, 289 sq. km and a total length of 2,880 km (in India 1,114 km). The Indus also known as the Sindhu, is the westernmost of the Himalayan rivers in India. It originates from a glacier near Bokhar Chu (31°°15' N latitude and 81°°40' E longitude) in the
Tibetan region at an altitude of 4,164 m in the Kailash Mountain range. In Tibet, it is known as ‘Singi Khamban; or Lion’s mouth.
After flowing in the northwest direction between the Ladakh and Zaskar ranges, it passes through Ladakh and Baltistan. It cuts across the Ladakh range, forming a spectacular gorge near Gilgit in Ladakh. It enters into Pakistan near Chilas in the
Dardistan region. Find out the area known as Dardistan.
The Indus receives a number of Himalayan tributaries such as the Shyok, the Gilgit, the
Zaskar, the Hunza, the Nubra, the Shigar, the
Gasting and the Dras. It finally emerges out of the hills near Attock where it receives the Kabul river on its right bank. The other important tributaries joining the right bank of the Indus are the Khurram, the Tochi, the Gomal, the
Viboa and the Sangar. They all originate in the
Sulaiman ranges. The river flows southward and receives ‘Panjnad’ a little above Mithankot.
The Panjnad is the name given to the five rivers of Punjab, namely the Satluj, the Beas, the
Ravi, the Chenab and the Jhelum. It finally
21 DRAINAGE SYSTEM discharges into the Arabian Sea, east of Karachi.
The Indus flows in India through Union
Territories of Ladakh and Jammu and Kashmir.
The Jhelum, an important tributary of the Indus, rises from a spring at Verinag situated at the foot of the Pir Panjal in the south-eastern part of the valley of Kashmir.
It flows through Srinagar and the Wular lake before entering Pakistan through a deep narrow gorge. It joins the Chenab near Jhang in Pakistan.
The Chenab is the largest tributary of the
Indus. It is formed by two streams, the
Chandra and the Bhaga, which join at
Tandi near Keylong in Himachal Pradesh.
Hence, it is also known as Chandrabhaga.
The river flows for 1,180 km before entering into Pakistan.
The Ravi is another important tributary of the Indus. It rises west of the Rohtang pass in the Kullu hills of Himachal Pradesh and flows through the Chamba valley of the state. Before entering Pakistan and joining the Chenab near
Sarai Sidhu, it drains the area lying between the southeastern part of the Pir Panjal and the
Dhauladhar ranges.
The Beas is another important tributary of the Indus, originating from the Beas Kund near the Rohtang Pass at an elevation of 4,000 m above the mean sea level. The river flows through the Kullu valley and forms gorges at
Kati and Largi in the Dhaoladhar range. It enters the Punjab plains where it meets the
Satluj near Harike.
The Satluj originates in the ‘Raksas tal’ near
Mansarovar at an altitude of 4,555 m in Tibet where it is known as Langchen Khambab. It flows almost parallel to the Indus for about 400 km before entering India, and comes out of a gorge at Rupar. It passes through the Shipki
La on the Himalayan ranges and enters the
Punjab plains. It is an antecedent river. It is a very important tributary as it feeds the canal system of the Bhakra Nangal project.
The Ganga System
The Ganga is the most important river of
India both from the point of view of its basin and cultural significance. It rises in the
Gangotri glacier near Gaumukh (3,900 m)
in the Uttarkashi district of Uttarakhand.
Here, it is known as the Bhagirathi. It cuts through the Central and the Lesser
Himalayas in narrow gorges. At Devprayag, the Bhagirathi meets the Alaknanda;
hereafter, it is known as the Ganga. The
Alaknanda has its source in the Satopanth glacier above Badrinath. The Alaknanda consists of the Dhauli and the Vishnu Ganga which meet at Joshimath or Vishnu Prayag.
The other tributaries of Alaknanda such as the Pindar joins it at Karna Prayag while Mandakini or Kali Ganga meets it at
Rudra Prayag. The Ganga enters the plains at Haridwar. From here, it flows first to the south, then to the south-east and east before splitting into two distributaries, namely the Bhagirathi and the Padma. The river has a length of 2,525 km. It is shared by
Uttarakhand (110 km) and Uttar Pradesh (1,450 km), Bihar (445 km) and West Bengal (520 km). The Ganga basin covers about 8.6 lakh sq. km area in India alone. The Ganga
Do you Know?
‘Namami Gange Programme’, is an
Integrated Conservation Mission, approved as “Flagship Programme” by the Union
Government in June 2014 with the twin objectives of effective abatement of pollution, conservation and rejuvenation of the
National River Ganga.
Main pillars of the Namami Gange
Programme are:
• Sewerage Treatment Infrastructure
• River-Front Development
• River-Surface Cleaning
• Bio-Diversity
• Afforestation
• Public Awareness
• Industrial Effluent Monitoring
• Ganga Gram
You may explore about this project at http://nmcg.nic.in/NamamiGanga.aspx#
22 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT river system is the largest in India having a number of perennial and non-perennial rivers originating in the Himalayas in the north and the Peninsula in the south, respectively. The Son is its major right bank t r i b u t a r y . T h e i m p o r t a n t l e f t b a n k tributaries are the Ramganga, the Gomati, the Ghaghara, the Gandak, the Kosi and the
Mahananda. The river finally discharges itself into the Bay of Bengal near the
Sagar Island.
The Yamuna, the western most and the longest tributary of the Ganga, has its source in the Yamunotri glacier on the western slopes of Banderpunch range (6,316 m). It joins the Ganga at Prayag (Allahabad). It is joined by the Chambal, the Sind, the Betwa and the Ken on its right bank which originates from the Peninsular plateau while the Hindan, the Rind, the Sengar, the Varuna, etc. join it on its left bank. Much of its water feeds the western and eastern Yamuna and the Agra canals for irrigation purposes.
Name the states which are drained by the river Yamuna.
The Chambal rises near Mhow in the
Malwa plateau of Madhya Pradesh and flows northwards through a gorge up wards of Kota in Rajasthan, where the Gandhisagar dam has been constructed. From Kota, it traverses down to Bundi, Sawai Madhopur and Dholpur, and finally joins the Yamuna. The Chambal is famous for its badland topography called the
Chambal ravines.
The Gandak comprises two streams, namely Kaligandak and Trishulganga. It rises in the Nepal Himalayas between the Dhaulagiri and Mount Everest and drains the central part of Nepal. It enters the Ganga plain in
Champaran district of Bihar and joins the
Ganga at Sonpur near Patna.
The Ghaghara originates in the glaciers of
Mapchachungo. After collecting the waters of its tributaries – Tila, Seti and Beri, it comes out of the mountain, cutting a deep gorge at
Shishapani. The river Sarda (Kali or Kali
Ganga) joins it in the plain before it finally meets the Ganga at Chhapra.
The Kosi is an antecedent river with its source to the north of Mount Everest in Tibet, where its main stream Arun rises. After crossing the Central Himalayas in Nepal, it is joined by the Son Kosi from the West and the
Tamur Kosi from the east. It forms Sapt Kosi after uniting with the river Arun.
The Ramganga is comparatively a small river rising in the Garhwal hills near Gairsain.
It changes its course to the southwest direction after crossing the Shiwalik and enters into the plains of Uttar Pradesh near Najibabad. Finally, it joins the Ganga near Kannauj.
The Damodar occupies the eastern margins of the Chotanagpur Plateau where it flows through a rift valley and finally joins the Hugli.
The Barakar is its main tributary. Once known as the ‘sorrow of Bengal’, the Damodar has been now tamed by the Damodar Valley corporation, a multipurpose project.
The Sarda or Saryu river rises in the Milam glacier in the Nepal Himalayas where it is known as the Goriganga. Along the Indo-Nepal border, it is called Kali or Chauk, where it joins the Ghaghara.
The Mahananda is another important tributary of the Ganga rising in the Darjiling hills. It joins the Ganga as its last left bank tributary in West Bengal.
The Son is a large south bank tributary of the Ganga, originating in the Amarkantak plateau. After forming a series of waterfalls at the edge of the plateau, it reaches Arrah, west of Patna, to join the Ganga.
The Brahmaputra System
The Brahmaputra, one of the largest rivers o f t h e w o r l d , h a s i t s o r i g i n i n t h e
Chemayungdung glacier of the Kailash range near the Mansarovar lake. From here, it traverses eastward longitudinally for a distance of nearly 1,200 km in a dry and flat region of southern Tibet, where it is known as the Tsangpo, which means ‘the purifier.’ The Rango Tsangpo is the major right bank tributary of this river in Tibet. It emerges as a turbulent and dynamic river after carving out a deep gorge in the Central
23 DRAINAGE SYSTEM
Himalayas near Namcha Barwa (7,755 m).
The river emerges from the foothills under the name of Siang or Dihang. It enters India west of Sadiya town in Arunachal Pradesh.
Flowing southwest, it receives its main left bank tributaries, viz., Dibang or Sikang and
Lohit; thereafter, it is known as the
Brahmaputra.
The Brahmaputra receives numerous tributaries in its 750 km long journey through the Assam valley. Its major left bank tributaries are the Burhi Dihing and Dhansari (South) whereas the important right bank tributaries are the Subansiri, Kameng, Manas and Sankosh. The Subansiri which has its origin in Tibet, is an antecedent river. The
Brahmaputra enters into Bangladesh near
Dhubri and flows southward. In Bangladesh, the Tista joins it on its right bank from where the river is known as the Jamuna. It finally merges with the river Padma, which falls in the
Bay of Bengal. The Brahmaputra is well-known for floods, channel shifting and bank erosion.
This is due to the fact that most of its tributaries are large, and bring large quantity of sediments owing to heavy rainfall in its catchment area.
THE PENINSULAR DRAINAGE SYSTEM
The Peninsular drainage system is older than the Himalayan one. This is evident from the broad, largely-graded shallow valleys, and the maturity of the rivers. The Western Ghats running close to the western coast act as the water divide between the major Peninsular rivers, discharging their water in the Bay of
Bengal and as small rivulets joining the
Arabian Sea. Most of the major Peninsular rivers except Narmada and Tapi flow from west to east. The Chambal, the Sind, the Betwa, the
Ken, the Son, originating in the northern part of the Peninsula belong to the Ganga river system. The other major river systems of the
Peninsular drainage are – the Mahanadi the
Godavari, the Krishna and the Kaveri.
Peninsular rivers are characterised by fixed course, absence of meanders and non- perennial flow of water. The Narmada and the
Tapi which flow through the rift valley are, however, exceptions.
The Evolution of Peninsular Drainage
Three major geological events in the distant past have shaped the present drainage systems of Peninsular India: (i) Subsidence of the western flank of the Peninsula leading to its submergence below the sea during the early tertiary period. Generally, it has disturbed the symmetrical plan of the river on either side of the original watershed.
(ii) Upheaval of the Himalayas when the northern flank of the Peninsular block was subjected to subsidence and the consequent trough faulting. The Narmada and The Tapi flow in trough faults and fill the original cracks with their detritus materials. Hence, there is a lack of a
