29 CLIMATE
Now, let us see the regional variations in precipitation. While snowfall occurs in the
Himalayas, it only rains over the rest of the country. Similarly, variations are noticeable not only in the type of precipitation but also in its amount. While Cherrapunji and Mawsynram in the Khasi Hills of Meghalaya receive rainfall over 1,080 cm in a year, Jaisalmer in Rajasthan rarely gets more than 9 cm of rainfall during the same period.
Tura situated in the Garo Hills of
Meghalaya may receive an amount of rainfall in a single day which is equal to 10 years of rainfall at Jaisalmer. While the annual precipitation is less than 10 cm in the north- west Himalayas and the western deserts, it exceeds 400 cm in Meghalaya.
The Ganga delta and the coastal plains of Odisha are hit by strong rain-bearing storms almost every third or fifth day in July and August while the Coromandal coast, a thousand km to the south, goes generally dry during these months. Most parts of the c o u n t r y g e t r a i n f a l l d u r i n g J u n e -
September, but on the coastal areas of Tamil
Nadu, it rains in the beginning of the winter
In spite of these differences and variations, the climate of India is monsoonal in rhythm and character.
FACTORS DETERMINING THE CLIMATE OF INDIA
India’s climate is controlled by a number of factors.
Latitude : You already know the latitudinal and longitudinal extent of the land of India.
You also know that the Tropic of Cancer passes through the central part of India in east-west direction. Thus, northern part of the India lies in sub-tropical and temperate zone and the part lying south of the Tropic of Cancer falls in the tropical zone. The tropical zone being nearer to the equator, experiences high temperatures throughout the year with small daily and annual range.
Area north of the Tropic of Cancer being away from the equator, experiences extreme climate with high daily and annual range of temperature.
The Himalayan Mountains : The lofty
Himalayas in the north along with its extensions act as an effective climatic divide.
The towering mountain chain provides an invincible shield to protect the subcontinent from the cold northern winds. These cold and chilly winds originate near the Arctic circle and blow across central and eastern Asia. The
Himalayas also trap the monsoon winds, forcing them to shed their moisture within the subcontinent.
Distribution of Land and Water : India is flanked by the Indian Ocean on three sides in the south and girdled by a high and continuous mountain-wall in the north. As compared to the landmass, water heats up or cools down slowly. This differential heating of land and sea creates different air pressure zones in different seasons in and around the Indian subcontinent. Difference in air pressure causes reversal in the direction of monsoon winds.
Distance from the Sea : With a long coastline, large coastal areas have an equable climate.
Areas in the interior of India are far away from the moderating influence of the sea. Such areas have extremes of climate. That is why, the people of Mumbai and the Konkan coast have hardly any idea of extremes of temperature and the seasonal rhythm of weather. On the other hand, the seasonal contrasts in weather at places in the interior of the country such as Delhi,
Kanpur and Amritsar affect the entire sphere of life.
Altitude : Temperature decreases with height. Due to thin air, places in the mountains are cooler than places on the plains. For example, Agra and Darjiling are l o c a t e d o n t h e s a m e l a t i t u d e , b u t temperature of January in Agra is 16°°C whereas it is only 4°°C in Darjiling.
Relief : The physiography or relief of India also affects the temperature, air pressure, direction and speed of wind and the amount and distribution of rainfall. The windward sides
30 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT of Western Ghats and Assam receive high rainfall during June-September whereas the southern plateau remains dry due to its leeward situation along the Western Ghats.
THE NATURE OF INDIAN MONSOON
Monsoon is a familiar though a little known climatic phenomenon. Despite the observations spread over centuries, the monsoon continues to puzzle the scientists. Many attempts have been made to discover the exact nature and causation of monsoon, but so far, no single theory has been able to explain the monsoon fully. A real breakthrough has come recently when it was studied at the global rather than at regional level.
Systematic studies of the causes of rainfall in the South Asian region help to understand the causes and salient features of the monsoon, particularly some of its important aspects, such as:
(i) The onset of the monsoon.
(ii) Break in the monsoon.
Onset of the Monsoon
Towards the end of the nineteenth century, it was believed that the differential heating of land and sea during the summer months is the mechanism which sets the stage for the monsoon winds to drift towards the subcontinent. During April and May when the sun shines vertically over the Tropic of Cancer, the large landmass in the north of Indian ocean gets intensely heated. This causes the formation of an intense low pressure in the northwestern part of the subcontinent. Since the pressure in the Indian Ocean in the south of the landmass is high as water gets heated slowly, the low pressure cell attracts the southeast trades across the Equator. These conditions help in the northward shift in the position of the ITCZ. The southwest monsoon may thus, be seen as a continuation of the southeast trades deflected towards the Indian subcontinent after crossing the Equator. These winds cross the Equator between 40°°E and
60°°E longitudes.
Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ)
The Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) is a low pressure zone located at the equator where trade winds converge, and so, it is a zone where air tends to ascend. In July, the
ITCZ is located around 20°N-25°N latitudes (over the Gangetic plain), sometimes called the monsoon trough. This monsoon trough encourages the development of thermal low over north and northwest India. Due to the shift of ITCZ, the trade winds of the southern hemisphere cross the equator between 40° and 60°E longitudes and start blowing from southwest to northeast due to the Coriolis force. It becomes southwest monsoon. In winter, the ITCZ moves southward, and so the reversal of winds from northeast to south and southwest, takes place. They are called northeast monsoons.
Figure 4.1 : Onset of Monsoon
Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ)
The Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) is a low pressure zone located at the equator where trade winds converge, and so, it is a zone where air tends to ascend. In July, the
ITCZ is located around 20°°N-25°°N latitudes (over the Gangetic plain), sometimes called the monsoon trough. This monsoon trough encourages the development of thermal low over north and northwest India. Due to the shift of ITCZ, the trade winds of the southern hemisphere cross the equator between 40°° and 60°°E longitudes and start blowing from southwest to northeast due to the Coriolis force. It becomes southwest monsoon. In winter, the ITCZ moves southward, and so the reversal of winds from northeast to south and southwest, takes place. They are called northeast monsoons.
31 CLIMATE
The shift in the position of the ITCZ is also related to the phenomenon of the withdrawal of the westerly jet stream from its position over the north Indian plain, south of the Himalayas.
The easterly jet stream sets in along 15°°N latitude only after the western jet stream has withdrawn itself from the region. This easterly jet stream is held responsible for the burst of the monsoon in India.
Entry of Monsoon into India : The southwest monsoon sets in over the Kerala coast by 1st
June and moves swiftly to reach Mumbai and Kolkata between 10th and 13th June.
By mid-July, southwest monsoon engulfs the entire subcontinent (Figure 4.2)
Break in the Monsoon
During the south-west monsoon period after having rains for a few days, if rain fails to occur for one or more weeks, it is known as break in the monsoon. These dry spells are quite common during the rainy season. These breaks in the different regions are due to different reasons:
(i) In northern India rains are likely to fail if the rain-bearing storms are not very frequent along the monsoon trough or the ITCZ over this region.
(ii) Over the west coast the dry spells are associated with days when winds blow parallel to the coast.
THE RHYTHM OF SEASONS
The climatic conditions of India can best be described in terms of an annual cycle of seasons. The meteorologists recognise the following four seasons :
(i) the cold weather season (ii) the hot weather season (iii) the southwest monsoon season (iv) the retreating monsoon season.
The Cold Weather Season
Temperature : Usually, the cold weather season sets in by mid-November in northern
India. December and January are the coldest months in the northern plain. The mean daily temperature remains below 21°°C over most parts of northern India. The night temperature may be quite low, sometimes going below freezing point in Punjab and
Rajasthan.
There are three main reasons for the excessive cold in north India during this season :
(i) States like Punjab, Haryana and
Rajasthan being far away from the moderating influence of sea experience continental climate.
(ii) The snowfall in the nearby Himalayan ranges creates cold wave situation;
(iii) Around February, the cold winds coming from the Caspian Sea and Turkmenistan
EI-Nino and the Indian Monsoon
EI-Nino is a complex weather system that appears once every three to seven years, bringing drought, floods and other weather extremes to different parts of the world.
The system involves oceanic and atmospheric phenomena with the appearance of warm currents off the coast of Peru in the Eastern Pacific and affects weather in many places including
India. EI-Nino is merely an extension of the warm equatorial current which gets replaced temporarily by cold Peruvian current or Humbolt current (locate these currents in your atlas). This current increases the temperature of water on the Peruvian coast by 10°°C. This results in:
(i) the distortion of equatorial atmospheric circulation;
(ii) irregularities in the evaporation of sea water;
(iii) reduction in the amount of planktons which further reduces the number of fish in the sea.
The word EI-Nino means ‘Child Christ’ because this current appears around Christmas in December. December is a summer month in Peru (Southern Hemisphere).
EI-Nino is used in India for forecasting long range monsoon rainfall. In 1990-91, there was a wild EI-Nino event and the onset of southwest monsoon was delayed over most parts of the country ranging from five to twelve days.
32 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Figure 4.2 : India : Normal Dates of Onset of the Southwest Monsoon
33 CLIMATE bring cold wave along with frost and fog over the northwestern parts of India.
Understanding the Monsoon
Attempts have been made to understand the nature and mechanism of the monsoon on the basis of data collected on land, oceans and in the upper atmosphere. The intensity of southwest monsoon winds of southern oscillation can be measured, among others, by measuring the difference in pressure between Tahiti (roughly 20°°S and
140°°W) in French Polynesia in East
Pacific and port Darwin (12°°30'S and
131°°E) in northern Australia. Indian
Meteorological Department (IMD) can forecast the possible behaviour of monsoons on the basis of 16 indicators.
Due to low pressure gradient, the light winds with a low velocity of about 3-5 km per hour begin to blow outwards. By and large, the topography of the region influences the wind direction. They are westerly or northwesterly down the Ganga Valley. They become northerly in the Ganga-Brahmaputra delta. Free from the influence of topography, they are clearly northeasterly over the Bay of
During the winters, the weather in India is pleasant. The pleasant weather conditions, however, at intervals, get disturbed by shallow cyclonic depressions originating over the east
Mediterranean Sea and travelling eastwards across West Asia, Iran, Afghanistan and
Pakistan before they reach the northwestern parts of India. On their way, the moisture content gets augmented from the Caspian Sea in the north and the Persian Gulf in the south.
What is the role of Westerly Jet Streams in steering these depressions in India?
Rainfall : Winter monsoons do not cause rainfall as they move from land to the sea. It is because firstly, they have little humidity; and secondly, due to anti cyclonic circulation on land, the possibility of rainfall from them reduces. So, most parts of India do not have rainfall in the winter season. However, there are some exceptions to it:
(i) In northwestern India, some weak temperate cyclones from the
Mediterranean sea cause rainfall in
Punjab, Haryana, Delhi and western
Uttar Pradesh. Although the amount is meagre, it is highly beneficial for rabi crops. The precipitation is in the f o r m o f s n o w f a l l i n t h e l o w e r
Himalayas. It is this snow that sustains the flow of water in the
Himalayan rivers during the summer months. The precipitation goes on decreasing from west to east in the plains and from north to south in the mountains. The average winter rainfall in Delhi is around 53 mm. In
Punjab and Bihar, rainfall remains
The Peninsular region of India, however, does not have any well-defined cold weather season. There is hardly any seasonal change in the distribution pattern of the temperature in coastal areas because of moderating influence of the sea and the proximity to equator. For example, the mean maximum temperature for January at Thiruvanantapuram is as high as 21°°C, and for June, it is 29.5°°C. Temperatures at the hills of Wester n Ghats remain comparatively low.
Pressure and Winds : By the end of December (22nd December), the sun shines vertically over the Tropic of Capricorn in the southern hemisphere. The weather in this season is characterised by feeble high pressure conditions over the northern plain. In south India, the air pressure is slightly lower. The isobars of 1019 mb and 1013 mb pass through northwest India and far south, respectively.
As a result, winds start blowing from northwestern high pressure zone to the low air pressure zone over the Indian Ocean in the south.
34 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT south rather it increases from the coast to the interior. The mean daily minimum temperature during the summer months also remains quite high and rarely goes below 26°°C.
Pressure and Winds : The summer months are a period of excessive heat and falling air pressure in the northern half of the country.
Because of the heating of the subcontinent, the ITCZ moves northwards occupying a position centred at 25°°N in July. Roughly, this elongated low pressure monsoon trough extends over the Thar desert in the north-west to Patna and Chotanagpur plateau in the east-southeast. The location of the ITCZ attracts a surface circulation of the winds which are southwesterly on the west coast as well as along the coast of West Bengal and
Bangladesh. They are easterly or south- easterly over north Bengal and Bihar. It has been discussed earlier that these currents of southwesterly monsoon are in reality
‘displaced’ equatorial easterlies. The influx of these winds by mid-June brings about a change in the weather towards the rainy season.
In the heart of the ITCZ in the northwest, the dry and hot winds known as ‘Loo’, blow in the afternoon, and very often, they continue to well into midnight. Dust storms in the evening are very common during May in Punjab, Haryana, Eastern Rajasthan and
Uttar Pradesh. These temporary storms bring a welcome respite from the oppressing heat since they bring with them light rains and a pleasant cool breeze. Occasionally, the moisture-laden winds are attracted towards the periphery of the trough. A sudden contact between dry and moist air masses gives rise to local storms of great intensity.
These local storms are associated with violent winds, torrential rains and even hailstorms.
b e t w e e n 2 5 m m a n d 1 8 m m respectively.
(ii) Central parts of India and northern parts of southern Peninsula also get winter rainfall occasionally.
(iii) Arunachal Pradesh and Assam in the northeastern parts of India also have rains between 25 mm and 50 mm during these winter months.
(iv) D u r i n g O c t o b e r a n d N o v e m b e r, northeast monsoon while crossing over the Bay of Bengal, picks up moisture and causes torrential rainfall over the
Tamil Nadu coast, southern Andhra
Pradesh, southeast Karnataka and southeast Kerala.
The Hot Weather Season
Temperature: With the apparent northward movement of the sun towards the Tropic of
Cancer in March, temperatures start rising in north India. April, May and June are the months of summer in north India. In most parts of India, temperatures recorded are between 30°-32°°C. In March, the highest day temperature of about 38°°C occurs in t h e D e c c a n P l a t e a u w h i l e i n A p r i l , temperature ranging between 38°°C and
43°°C are found in Gujarat and Madhya
Pradesh. In May, the heat belt moves further north, and in the north-western part of India, temperatures around 48°°C are not uncommon.
The hot weather season in south India is mild and not so intense as found in north
India. The Peninsular situation of south
India with moderating effect of the oceans keeps the temperatures lower than that prevailing in north India. So, temperatures remain between 26°°C and 32°°C. Due to altitude, the temperatures in the hills of
Western Ghats remain below 25°°C. In the coastal regions, the north-south extent of isotherms parallel to the coast confirms that temperature does not decrease from north to
35 CLIMATE
Some Famous Local Storms of Hot
Weather Season (i) Mango Shower : Towards the end of summer, there are pre-monsoon s
