43 NATURAL VEGETATION
Figure 5.2 : Natural Vegetation
Reprint 2026-27
44 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
The British were aware of the economic value of the forests in India, hence, large scale exploitation of these forests was started. The structure of forests was also changed. The oak forests in Garhwal and Kumaon were replaced by pine (chirs) which was needed to lay railway lines. Forests were also cleared for introducing plantations of tea, rubber and coffee. The
British also used timber for construction activities as it acts as an insulator of heat. The protectional use of forests was, thus, replaced by commercial use.
Tropical Deciduous Forests
These are the most widespread forests in India.
They are also called the monsoon forests. They spread over regions which receive rainfall between 70-200 cm. On the basis of the availability of water, these forests are further divided into moist and dry deciduous.
The Moist deciduous forests are more pronounced in the regions which record rainfall between 100-200 cm. These forests are found in the northeastern states along the foothills of
Himalayas, eastern slopes of the Western Ghats and Odisha. Teak, sal, shisham, hurra, mahua, amla, semul, kusum, and sandalwood etc. are the main species of these forests.
Dry deciduous forest covers vast areas of the country, where rainfall ranges between
70 -100 cm. On the wetter margins, it has a transition to the moist deciduous, while on the drier margins to thorn forests. These forests are found in rainier areas of the Peninsula and the plains of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. In the higher rainfall regions of the Peninsular plateau and the northern Indian plain, these forests have a parkland landscape with open stretches in which teak and other trees interspersed with patches of grass are common. As the dry season begins, the trees shed their leaves completely and the forest appears like a vast grassland with naked trees all around. Tendu, palas, amaltas, bel, khair, axlewood, etc. are the common trees of these forests. In the western and southern part of Rajasthan, vegetation cover is very scanty due to low rainfall and overgrazing.
Tropical Thorn Forests
Tropical thorn forests occur in the areas which receive rainfall less than 50 cm. These consist of a variety of grasses and shrubs. It includes semi-arid areas of south west Punjab,
Haryana, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh. In these forests, plants remain leafless for most part of the year and give an expression of scrub vegetation.
Important species found are babool, ber, and wild date palm, khair, neem, khejri, palas, etc.
Tussocky grass grows upto a height of 2 m as the under growth.
Montane Forests
In mountainous areas, the decrease in temperature with increasing altitude leads to a corresponding change in natural vegetation.
Mountain forests can be classified into two types, the northern mountain forests and the southern mountain forests.
Figure 5.3 : Deciduous Forests
Figure 5.4 : Tropical Thorn Forests
Reprint 2026-27
45 NATURAL VEGETATION
The Himalayan ranges show a succession of vegetation from the tropical to the tundra, which change in with the altitude. Deciduous forests are found in the foothills of the
Himalayas. It is succeeded by the wet temperate type of forests between an altitude of 1,000-2,000 m. In the higher hill ranges of northeastern India, hilly areas of West Bengal and Uttaranchal, evergreen broad leaf trees such as oak and chestnut are predominant.
Between 1,500-1,750 m, pine forests are also well-developed in this zone, with Chir Pine as a very useful commercial tree. Deodar, a highly valued endemic species grows mainly in the western part of the Himalayan range. Deodar is a durable wood mainly used in construction activity. Similarly, the chinar and the walnut, which sustain the famous Kashmir handicrafts, belong to this zone. Blue pine and spruce appear at altitudes of 2,225-3,048 m.
At many places in this zone, temperate grasslands are also found. But in the higher reaches there is a transition to Alpine forests and pastures. Silver firs, junipers, pines, birch and rhododendrons, etc. occur between
3,000-4,000 m. However, these pastures are used extensively for transhumance by tribes like the Gujjars, the Bakarwals, the Bhotiyas and the Gaddis. The southern slopes of the
Himalayas carry a thicker vegetation cover because of relatively higher precipitation than the drier north-facing slopes. At higher altitudes, mosses and lichens form part of the tundra vegetation.
The southern mountain forests include the forests found in three distinct areas of
Peninsular India viz; the Western Ghats, the
Vindhyas and the Nilgiris. As they are closer to the tropics, and only 1,500 m above the sea level, vegetation is temperate in the higher regions, and subtropical on the lower regions of the Western Ghats, especially in Kerala,
Tamil Nadu and Karnataka. The temperate forests are called Sholas in the Nilgiris,
Anaimalai and Palani hills. Some of the other trees of this forest of economic significance include, magnolia, laurel, cinchona and wattle. Such forests are also found in the
Satpura and the Maikal ranges.
Littoral and Swamp Forests
India has a rich variety of wetland habitats.
About 70 per cent of this comprises areas under paddy cultivation. The total area of wet land is 3.9 million hectares. Two sites —
Chilika Lake (Odisha) and Keoladeo National
Park (Bharatpur) are protected as water-fowl habitats under the Convention of Wetlands of
International Importance (Ramsar Convention).
An international convention is an agreement among member states of the United Nations.
The country’s wetlands have been grouped into eight categories, viz. (i) the reservoirs of the
Deccan Plateau in the south together with the lagoons and other wetlands of the southern west coast; (ii) the vast saline expanses of
Rajasthan, Gujarat and the Gulf of Kachchh;
(iii) freshwater lakes and reservoirs from Gujarat eastwards through Rajasthan (Keoladeo
National Park) and Madhya Pradesh; (iv) the delta wetlands and lagoons of India’s east coast (Chilika Lake); (v) the freshwater marshes of the
Gangetic Plain; (vi) the floodplains of the
Brahmaputra; the marshes and swamps in the hills of northeast India and the Himalayan foothills; (vii) the lakes and rivers of the montane region of Kashmir and Ladakh; and (viii) the mangrove forest and other wetlands of the island arcs of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
Mangroves grow along the coasts in the salt marshes, tidal creeks, mud flats and estuaries. Figure 5.5 : Montane Forests
Reprint 2026-27
46 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
They consist of a number of salt-tolerant species of plants. Crisscrossed by creeks of stagnant water and tidal flows, these forests give shelter to a wide variety of birds.
In India, the mangrove forests spread over
4,992 sq. km which is 7 per cent of the world’s mangrove forests. They are highly developed in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands and the
Sunderbans of West Bengal. Other areas of significance are the Mahanadi, the Godavari and the Krishna deltas. These forests too, are being encroached upon, and hence, need conservation.
FOREST CONSERVATION
Forests have an intricate interrelationship with life and environment. These provide numerous direct and indirect advantages to our economy and society. Hence, conservation of forest is of vital importance to the survival and prosperity of humankind.
Accordingly, the Government of India proposed to have a nation-wide forest conservation policy, and adopted a forest policy in 1952, which was further modified in 1988. According to the new forest policy, the Government will emphasise sustainable forest management in order to conserve and expand forest reserve on the one hand, and to meet the needs of local people on the other.
The forest policy aimed at : (i) bringing 33 per cent of the geographical areas under forest cover; (ii) maintaining environmental stability and to restore forests where ecological balance was disturbed; (iii)
conserving the natural heritage of the country, its biological diversity and genetic pool; (iv)
checks soil erosion, extension of the desert lands and reduction of floods and droughts; (v)
increasing the forest cover through social forestry and afforestation on degraded land; (vi)
increasing the productivity of forests to make timber, fuel, fodder and food available to rural population dependant on forests, and encourage the substitution of wood; (vii)
creating of a massive peoples movement involving women to encourage planting of trees, stop felling of trees and thus, reduce pressure on the existing forest.
Forests and Life
To a vast number of tribal people, the forest is a home, a livelihood, their very existence. It provides them food, fruits of all kinds, edible leaves, honey, nourishing roots and wild game. It provides them with material to build their houses and items for practising their arts. The importance of forests in tribal economy is well-known as they are the source of sustenance and livelihood for tribal communities. It is commonly believed that the tribal communities live in harmony with nature and protect forests.
Forest and tribals are very closely related. The age-old knowledge of tribals regarding forestry can be used in the development of forests. Rather than treating tribals as minor forest produce collectors they should be made growers of minor forest produce and encouraged to participate in conservation.
Figure 5.6 : Mangrove Forests
Based on the forest conservation policy the following steps were initiated:
Social Forestry
Social forestry means the management and protection of forests and afforestation on barren lands with the purpose of helping in the environmental, social and rural development.
The National Commission on Agriculture (1976) has classified social forestry into three
Reprint 2026-27
47 NATURAL VEGETATION categories. These are Urban forestry, Rural forestry and Farm forestry.
Urban forestry pertains to the raising and management of trees on public and privately owned lands in and around urban centres such as green belts, parks, roadside avenues, industrial and commercial green belts, etc.
Rural forestry lays emphasis on promotion of agro-forestry and community-forestry.
Agro-forestry is the raising of trees and agriculture crops on the same land inclusive of the waste patches. It combines forestry with agriculture, thus, altering the simultaneous production of food, fodder, fuel, timber and fruit. Community forestry involves the raising of trees on public or community land such as the village pasture and temple land, roadside, canal bank, strips along railway lines, and schools etc. Community forestry programme aims at providing benefits to the community as a whole. Community forestry provides a means under which the people of landless classes can associate themselves in tree- raising and thus, get those benefits which otherwise are restricted for landowners.
Farm Forestry
Farm forestry is a term applied to the process under which farmers grow trees for commercial and non-commercial purposes on their farm lands.
Forest departments of various states distribute seedlings of trees free of cost to small and medium farmers. Several lands such as the margins of agricultural fields, grasslands and pastures, land around homes and cow sheds may be used for raising trees under non- commercial farm forestry.
WILDLIFE
You would have visited a zoo and may have seen animals and birds in captivity. Wildlife of India is a great natural heritage. It is estimated that about 4-5 per cent of all known plant and animal species on the earth are found in India. The main reason for this remarkable diversity of life forms is the great diversity of the ecosystem which this country has preserved and supported through the ages. Over the years, their habitat has been disturbed by human activities and as a result, their numbers have dwindled significantly. There are certain species that are at the brink of extinction.
Some of the important reasons of the declining of wildlife are as follows:
(i) Industrial and technological advancement brought about a rapid increase in the exploitation of forest resources.
(ii) More and more lands were cleared for agriculture, human settlement, roads, mining, reservoirs, etc.
(iii) Pressure on forests mounted due to lopping for fodder and fuelwood and removal of small timber by the local people.
(iv) Grazing by domestic cattle caused an adverse effect on wildlife and its habitat.
(v) Hunting was taken up as a sport by the elite and hundreds of wild animals were killed in a single hunt. Now commercial poaching is rampant.
(vi) Incidence of forest fire.
It is being felt that conservation of wildlife is of great significance to the national as well as the world heritage along with the promotion of ecotourism. What steps have been initiated by the government in this direction?
WILDLIFE CONSERVATION IN INDIA
The protection of wildlife has a long tradition in
India. Many stories of Panchtantra and Jungle
Books, etc. have stood the test of time relating to the love for wildlife. These have a profound impact on young minds.
In 1972, a comprehensive Wildlife Act was enacted, which provides the main legal framework for conservation and protection of wildlife in India. The two main objectives of the
Act are; to provide protection to the endangered species listed in the schedule of the Act and to provide legal support to the conservation areas of the country classified as National parks, sanctuaries and closed areas. This Act has been
Reprint 2026-27
48 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT comprehensively amended in 1991, making punishments more stringent and has also made provisions for the protection of specified plant species and conservation of endangered species of wild animals.
There are 107 National parks and
573 wildlife sanctuaries in the country.
Wildlife conservation has a very large ambit with unbounded potential for the well- being of humankind. However, this can be achieved only when every individual understands its significance and contributes his bit.
For the purpose of effective conservation of flora and fauna, special steps have been initiated by the Government of India in collaboration with UNESCO’s ‘Man and
Biosphere Programme’.
Figure 5.7 : Elephants in their Natural Habitat
Table 5.1 : List of Biosphere Reserves
* Sites with bold letters have been included in the World Network of BRs of UNESCO.
Source : Annual Report 2024-25, Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India.
Sl. Name of the Biosphere Year of States/UT
No. Reserve Designation
1. Nilgiri 1986 Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Karnataka.
2. Nanda Devi 1988 Uttarakhand.
3. Nokrek 1988 Meghalaya.
4. Manas 1989 A ssam
5. Sunderban 1989 West Bengal.
6. Gulf of Mannar 1989 Tamil Nadu.
7. Great Nicobar 1989 A ndaman and Nicobar Islands.
8. Similipal 1994 Odisha.
9. Dibru-Saikhowa 1997 A ssam
10. Dehang Debang 1998 A runachal Pradesh.
11. Pachmarhi 1999 Madhya Pradesh.
12. Khangchendzonga 2000 Sikkim
13. Agasthyamalai 2001 Tamil Nadu, Kerala.
14. Achanakmar-Amarkantak 2005 Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh
15. Kachchh 2008 Gujarat.
16. Cold Desert 2009 Himachal Pradesh.
17. Seshachalam 2010 A ndhra Pradesh.
18. Panna 2011 Madhya Pradesh.
Reprint 2026-27
49 NATURAL VEGETATION
Figure 5.8 : India : Biosphere Reserves
Reprint 2026-27
50 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Figure 5.9 : Objectives of a Biosphere Reserve
Special schemes like Project Tiger (1973)
and Project Elephant (1992) have been launched to conserve these species and their habitat in a sustainable manner.
Project Tiger has been implemented since 1973. The main objective of the scheme i s t o e n s u r e m a i n t e n a n c e o f v i a b l e population of tigers in India for scientific, aesthetic, cultural and ecological values, a n d t o p r e s e r v e a r e a s o f b i o l o g i c a l importance as natural heritage for the benefit, education and enjoyment of the people. Initially, the Project T iger was launched in nine tiger reserves, covering an area of 16,339 sq. km, which has now increased to 58 tiger reserves, encompassing
84, 487 s q . k m o f c o r e t i g e r h a b i t a t s d i s t r i b u t e d i n 1 8 s t a t e s . T h e t i g e r population in the country has registered an increase from 1,411 in 2006 to 3,682 in 2023 which is more than 75 per cent of the global tiger population.
Project Elephant was launched in 1992 to assist states having free ranging population of wild elephants. It was aimed at ensuring long-term survival of identified viable population of elephants in their natural habitat. The project is being implemented in
18 states.
Apart from this, some other projects such as Crocodile Breeding Project, Project Hangul
EXERCISES
1. Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below.
(i) Sandalwood is an example of:
(a) Evergreen forest (c) Deltaic forest (b) Deciduous forest (d) Thorny forest (ii) Which one of the following was the purpose of Project Tiger?
(a) to kill tigers (c) to protect tigers from illegal hunting (b) to put tigers in the Zoo (d) to make films on tigers (iii) In which one of the following states is the Nandadevi Biosphere reserve situated?
(a) Bihar (c) Uttarakhand (b) Uttar Pradesh (d) Odisha and conservation of Himalayan Musk deer have also been launched by the Government of India.
BIOSPHERE RESERVES
A Biosphere Reserve is a unique and representative ecosystem of terrestrial and coastal areas which are internationally recognised within the framework of UNESCO’s
Man and Biosphere (MAB) Programme. The
Biosphere Reserve aims at achieving the three objectives as depicted in Figure 5.9.
There are 18 Biosphere Reserves in India (Table 5.1, Figure 5.8). Twelve Biosphere
Reserves have been recognised by the
UNESCO on World Network of Biosphere
Reserves.
Reprint 2026-27
51 NATURAL VEGETATION (iv) How many of the Biosphere reserves from India are recognised by the (a) One (
