54 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT not the only causes of disasters. Disasters are also caused by some human activities.
There are some activities carried by human beings that are directly responsible for disasters. Bhopal Gas tragedy, Chernobyl nuclear disaster, wars, release of CFCs (Chlorofluorocarbons) and increase of green house gases, environmental pollutions like noise, air, water and soil are some of the disasters which are caused directly by human actions.
There are some other activities of human beings that accelerate or intensify disasters indirectly. Landslides and floods due to deforestation, unscientific land use and construction activities in fragile areas are some of the disasters that are the results of indirect human actions. Can you identify some other human activities going on in and around your neighbourhood and schools that can lead to disasters in the near future? Can you suggest some measures to prevent it? It is a common experience that human-made disasters have increased both in their numbers and magnitudes over the years and concerted efforts are on at various levels to prevent and minimise their occurrences. Though the success has been only nominal so far, it is possible to prevent some of these disasters created by human actions. As opposed to this, very little is possible to prevent natural disasters; therefore, the best way out is to emphasise on natural disaster mitigation and management. Establishment of National
Institute of Disaster Management, India,
Earth Summit at Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 1993 and the World Conference on Disaster
Management in May 1994 at Yokohama,
Japan, etc. are some of the concrete steps towards this direction initiated at different
Most often it is observed that scholars use disasters and natural hazards as interchangeable.
Both are related phenomena, yet quite distinct from each other. Hence, it is necessary to distinguish between the two.
Natural Hazards are elements of circumstances in the Natural environment that have the potential to cause harm to people or property or both. These may be swift or permanent aspects of the respective environmental settings like currents in the oceans, steep slope and unstable structural features in the Himalayas or extreme climatic conditions in deserts or glaciated areas.
As compared to natural hazards, natural disasters are relatively sudden and cause large scale, widespread death, loss of property and disturbance to social systems and life over which people have a little or no control. Thus, any event can be classed as disaster when the magnitude of destruction and damage caused by it is very high.
Generally, disasters are generalised experiences of people the world over, and no two disasters are similar and comparable to each other. Every disaster is unique in terms of the local socio-environmental factors that control it, the social response it generates, and the way each social group negotiates with it.
However, the opinion mentioned above is indicative of three important things. Firstly, the magnitude, intensity, frequency and damages caused by natural disasters have increased over the years. Secondly, there is a growing concern among people the world over to deal with the menace created by these so that the loss of human life and property can be minimised. And finally, significant changes have taken place in the pattern of natural disasters over the years.
There has also been a change in the perception of natural disasters and hazards.
Previously, hazards and disasters were seen as two closely associated and interrelated phenomena, i.e. areas prone to natural hazards, were more vulnerable to disasters.
Hence, people avoided tampering with the delicate balance that existed in a given ecosystem. People avoided intensification of their activities in such areas and that is how disasters were less damaging. Technological power has given large capacity to human intervention in nature. Consequently, now, human beings tend to intensify their activities into disaster prone areas increasing their vulnerability to disasters. Colonisation of flood plains of most of the rivers and development of large cities and port-towns like
– Mumbai and Chennai along the coast, and touching the shore due to high land values, make them vulnerable to the occurrence of cyclones, hurricanes and tsunamis.
Natural disasters have caused widespread loss of life and property.
55 NATURAL HAZARDS AND DISASTERS
Concerted efforts are on at various levels to take appropriate measures to deal with the situation. It is also being felt that the damages caused by natural disasters have global repercussions that are beyond the means and capabilities of individual nation- states to cope up with. Hence, this issue was raised at the U.N. General Assembly in
1989 and it was finally formalised at the
World Conference on Disaster Management in May 1994 at Yokohama, Japan. This was subsequently called the Yokohama
Strategy and Plan of Action for a Safer World.
CLASSIFICATION OF NATURAL DISASTERS
Human beings the world over have experienced disasters and have faced and lived with them. Now people are becoming aware and various steps have been initiated at different levels for mitigating the effects of disasters. Identification and classification of disasters is being considered as an effective and scientific step to deal promptly and efficiently with the disasters. Broadly, natural disasters can be classified under four categories (See Table 6.1).
India is one of those countries which has experienced most of the natural disasters mentioned in Table 6.1. Every year it loses thousands of lives and property worth millions of rupees due to these natural calamities. In the following section, some of the highly devastating natural disasters have been discussed, particularly in the context of India.
NATURAL DISASTERS AND HAZARDS IN INDIA
It was discussed in one of the previous chapters that India is vast and diverse in terms of its physical and socio-cultural attributes.
It is largely due to its vast geographical area, environmental diversities and cultural pluralities that scholars often described it using two meaningful adjectives like the
‘Indian-subcontinent’ and the ‘land of unity in diversity’. Its vastness in terms of natural attributes combined with its prolonged colonial past, continuing various forms of social discriminations and also equally large population have enhanced its vulnerability to natural disasters. These observations can also be illustrated by focussing on some of the major natural disasters in India.
Earthquakes
Earthquakes are by far the most unpredictable and highly destructive of all the natural disasters. You have already learnt the causes of earthquakes in your book Fundamentals of Physical Geography (NCERT, 2024).
Earthquakes that are of tectonic origin have proved to be the most devastating and their area of influence is also quite large. These earthquakes result from a series of earth movements brought about by a sudden release of energy during the tectonic activities in the earth’s crust. As compared to these, the earthquakes associated with volcanic eruption, rock fall, landslides, subsidence, particularly in the mining areas, impounding of dams and reservoirs, etc. have limited area of influence and the scale of damage.
It was mentioned in Chapter 2 of the book that the Indian plate is moving at a speed of one centimetre per year towards the north and northeastern direction and this movement of plates is being constantly obstructed by the Eurasian plate from the north. As a result of this, both the plates are
Figure 6.1 : A Damaged Building
Due to an Earthquake
Table 6.1 : Classification of Natural Disasters
Blizzards
Thunderstorms
Lightening
Tornadoes
Tropical Cyclone
Hailstorm
Frost, Heat
Wave or Loo,
Cold Wave etc
Atmospheric Terrestrial Aquatc Biological
Earthquakes
Volcanic Eruptions
Landslides
Avalanches
Subsidence
Soil Erosion
Tidal Waves
Storm Surge
Plants and
A nimals as colonisers (Locusts etc),
Insect’s infestation – fungal, bacterial and viral diseases such as bird flu, dengue etc.
56 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Yokohama Strategy and International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction (IDNDR)
Yokohama Strategy and Plan of Action for a Safer World
All the member states of the United Nations and other states met at the World Conference on Natural Disaster Reduction in the city of Yokohama from May 23rd-27th 1994. It acknowledged that the impact of natural disasters in terms of human and economic losses has risen in recent years, and society, in general, has become vulnerable to natural disasters.
It also accepted that these disasters affected the poor and disadvantageous groups the worst, particularly in the developing countries, which are ill-equipped to cope with them.
Hence, the conference adopted the Yokohama strategy as a guide to rest of the decade and beyond, to mitigate the losses due to these disasters.
The resolution of the World Conference on Natural Disasters Reduction is as mentioned below:
(i) It will note that each country has the sovereign responsibility to protect its citizens from natural disasters;
(ii) It will give priority attention to the developing countries, particularly the least developed, land-locked countries and small-island developing states;
(iii) It will develop and strengthen national capacities and capabilities and, where appropriate, national legislation for natural and other disaster prevention, mitigation and preparedness, including the mobilisation of non-governmental organisations and participation of local communities;
(iv) It will promote and strengthen sub-regional, regional and international cooperation in activities to prevent, reduce and mitigate natural and other disasters, with particular emphasis on:
(a) human and institutional capacity-building and strengthening;
(b) technology sharing: the collection, the dissemination and utilisation of information; and (c) mobilisation of resources.
It also declared the decade 1990-2000 as the International Decade for Natural Disaster
Reduction (IDNDR).
said to be locked with each other resulting in accumulation of energy at different points of time. Excessive accumulation of energy results in building up of stress, which ultimately leads to the breaking up of the lock and the sudden release of energy causes earthquakes along the
Himalayan arch. Some of the most vulnerable union territories/states are Jammu and
K ashmir, L adakh, Himachal Pradesh,
Uttarakhand, Sikkim, and the Darjeeling subdivision of West Bengal, and all the seven states of the northeast.
Apart from these regions, the central-western parts of India, particularly Gujarat (in 1819,
1956 and 2001) and Maharashtra (in 1967 and
1993) have also experienced some severe earthquakes. Earth scientists have found it difficult to explain the occurrence of earthquakes in one of the oldest, most stable and mature landmass of Peninsular block for a long time.
Recently, some earth scientists have come up with a theory of emergence of a fault line and energy build-up along the fault line represented by the river Bhima (Krishna) near Latur and
Osmanabad (Maharashtra) and the possible breaking down of the Indian plate (Figure 6.2).
National Geophysical Laboratory, Geological
Survey of India, Department of Meteorology,
Government of India, along with the recently formed National Institute of Disaster
Management, have made an intensive analysis of more than 1,200 earthquakes that have occurred in India in different years in the past, and based on these, they divided India into the following five earthquake zones:
(i) Very high damage risk zone (ii) High damage risk zone (iii) Moderate damage risk zone (iv) Low damage risk zone (v) Very low damage risk zone.
Out of these, the first two zones had experienced some of the most devastating earthquakes in India. As shown in the Figure
6.2, areas vulnerable to these earthquakes are the North-east states, areas to the north of Darbhanga and Araria along the Indo-
Nepal border in Bihar, Uttarakhand, Western
Himachal Pradesh (around Dharamshala)
and Kashmir Valley in the Himalayan region and the Kuchchh (Gujarat). These are included in the Very High Damage
57 NATURAL HAZARDS AND DISASTERS
Risk Zone. Similarly, the remaining parts o f Ja m m u a n d K a s h m i r, L a d a k h ,
Himachal Pradesh, Northern parts of
Punjab, Eastern parts of Haryana, Delhi,
Western Uttar Pradesh, and Northern
Bihar fall under the High Damage Risk
Zone. Remaining parts of the country fall under moderate to very Low Damage Risk
Zone. Most of the areas that can be c o n s i d e r e d s a f e a r e f r o m t h e s t a b l e l a n d m a s s c o v e r e d u n d e r t h e
Deccan plateau.
Socio-Environmental Consequences of
Earthquakes
The idea of an earthquake is often associated with fear and horror due to the scale, magnitude and suddenness at which it spreads disasters on the surface of the earth without discrimination. It becomes a calamity when it strikes the areas of high density of population. It not only damages and destroys the settlements, infrastructure, transport and communication network, industries and other developmental activities but also robs the population of their material and socio-cultural gains that they have preserved over generations. It renders them homeless, which puts an extra-pressure and stress, particularly on the weak economy of the developing countries.
Effects of Earthquakes
Earthquakes have all encompassing disastrous effects on the area of their occurrence. Some of the important ones are listed in Table 6.2.
fissures on the upper layers of the earth’s crust through which water and other volatile materials gush out, inundating the neighbouring areas. Earthquakes are also responsible for landslides and often these cause obstructions in the flow of rivers and channels resulting in the formation of reservoirs. Sometimes, rivers also change their course causing floods and other calamities in the affected areas.
Earthquake Hazard Mitigation
Unlike other disasters, the damages caused by earthquakes are more devastating. Since it also destroys most of the transport and communication links, providing timely relief to the victims becomes difficult. It is not possible to prevent the occurrence of an earthquake; hence, the next best option is to emphasis on disaster preparedness and mitigation rather than curative measures such as:
(i) Establishing earthquake monitoring centres (seismological centres) for regular monitoring and fast dissemination of information among the people in the vulnerable areas. Use of
Geographical Positioning System (GPS)
can be of great help in monitoring the movement of tectonic plates.
(ii) Preparing a vulnerability map of the country and dissemination of vulnerability risk information among the people and educating them about the ways and means minimising the adverse impacts of disasters.
(iii) Modifying the house types and building-designs in the vulnerable areas and discouraging construction of high- rise buildings, large industrial establishments and big urban centres in such areas.
(iv) Finally, making it mandatory to adopt earthquake-resistant designs and use light materials in major construction activities in the vulnerable areas.
Apart from these, earthquakes also have some serious and far-reaching environmental consequences. Surface seismic waves produce
Table 6.2 : Effects of Earthquakes
On Ground On Manmade On Water
Structures
Fissures Cracking Waves
Settlements Slidings Hydro-Dynamic
Pressure
Landslides Overturning Tsunami
Liquefaction Buckling
Earth Pressure Collapse
Possible
Chain-effects Possible Possible
Chain-effects Chain-effects
58 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Figure 6.2 : India: Earthquake Hazard Zones
59 NATURAL HAZARDS AND DISASTERS
Earthquakes and volcanic eruptions that cause the sea-floor to move abruptly resulting in sudden displacement of ocean water in the form of high vertical waves are called tsunamis (harbour waves) or seismic sea waves.
Normally, the seismic waves cause only one instantaneous vertical wave; but, after the initial disturbance, a series of afterwaves are created in the water that oscillate between high crest and low trough in order to restore the water
The speed of wave in the ocean depends upon the depth of water. It is more in the shallow water than in the ocean deep. As a result of this, the impact of tsunami is less over the ocean and more near the coast where they cause large-scale devastations. Therefore, a ship at sea is not much affected by tsunami and it is difficult to detect a tsunami in the deeper parts of sea. It is so because over deep water the tsunami has very long wave-length and limited wave-height. Thus, a tsunami wave raises the ship only a metre or two and each rise and fall takes several minutes. As opposed to this, when a tsunami enters shallow water, its wave-length gets reduced and the period remains unchanged, which increases the wave- height. Sometimes, this height can be up to
15m or more, which causes large-scale destructions along the shores. Thus, these are also called Shallow Water Waves. Tsunamis are frequently observed along the Pacific ring of fire, particularly along the coast of Alaska,
Japan, Philippines, and other islands of South- east Asia, Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar, Sri
Lanka, and India etc.
After reaching the coast, the tsunami waves release enormous energy stored in them and water flows turbulently onto the land destroying port-cities and towns, structures, buildings and other settlements. Since the coastal areas are densely populated the world over, and these are also centres of intense human activity, the loss of life and property is likely to be much higher by a tsunami as compared to other natural hazards in the coastal areas. The extent of devastation caused by tsunami can be assessed through the visuals on Banda Ache (Indonesia) presented in the book Practical Work in Geogra
