Map Projections
ELEMENTS OF MAP PROJECTION a. Reduced Earth: A model of the earth is represented by the help of a reduced scale on a flat sheet of paper. This model is called the “reduced earth”. This model should be more or less spheroid having the length of polar diameter lesser than equatorial and on this model the network of graticule can be transferred.
b. Parallels of Latitude: These are the circles running round the globe parallel to the equator and maintaining uniform distance from the poles. Each parallel lies wholly in its plane which is at right angle to the axis of the earth. They are not of equal length. They range from a point at each pole to the circumference of the globe at the equator. They are demarcated as 0º to 90º North and South latitudes.
c. Meridians of Longitude: These are semi-circles drawn in north- south direction from one pole to the other, and the two opposite meridians make a complete circle, i.e. circumference of the globe. Each meridian lies wholly in its plane, but all intersect at right angle along the axis of the globe. There is no obvious central meridian but for convenience, an arbitrary choice is made, namely the meridian of Greenwich, which is demarcated as 0° longitudes. It is used as reference longitudes to draw all other longitudes d. Global Property: In preparing a map projection the following basic properties of the global surface are to be preserved by using one or the other methods:
(i) Distance between any given points of a region;
(ii) Shape of the region;
(iii) Size or area of the region in accuracy;
(iv) Direction of any one point of the region bearing to another point.
CLASSIFICATION OF MAP PROJECTIONS
Map Projections may be classified on the following bases:
a. Drawing Techniques: On the basis of method of construction, projections are generally classified into perspective, non-perspective and
Practical Work in Geography conventional or mathematical. Perspective projections can be drawn taking the help of a source of light by projecting the image of a network of parallels and meridians of a globe on developable surface. Non–perspective projections are developed without the help of a source of light or casting shadow on surfaces, which can be flattened. Mathematical or conventional projections are those, which are derived by mathematical computation, and formulae and have little relations with the projected image.
b. Developable Surface: A developable surface is one, which can be flattened, and on which, a network of latitude and longitude can be projected. A non-developable surface is one, which cannot be flattened without shrinking, breaking or creasing. A globe or spherical surface has the property of non-developable surface whereas a cylinder, a cone and a plane have the property of developable surface. On the basis of nature of developable surface, the projections are classified as cylindrical, conical and zenithal projections. Cylindrical projections are made through the use of cylindrical developable surface. A paper-made cylinder covers the globe, and the parallels and meridians are projected on it. When the cylinder is cut open, it provides a cylindrical projection on the plane sheet. A Conical projection is drawn by wrapping a cone round the globe and the shadow of graticule network is projected on it. When the cone is cut open, a projection is obtained on a flat sheet. Zenithal projection is directly obtained on a plane surface when plane touches the globe at a point and the graticule is projected on it. Generally, the plane is so placed on the globe that it touches the globe at one of the poles. These projections are further subdivided into normal, oblique or polar as per the position of the plane touching the globe. If the developable surface touches the globe at the equator, it is called the
Figure 4.1 Conversions from a Globe to a flat surface produces distortions in area, shape and directions.
Map Projections equatorial or normal projection. If it is tangential to a point between the pole and the equator, it is called the oblique projection; and if it is tangential to the pole, it is called the polar projection.
c. Global Properties: As mentioned above, the correctness of area, shape, direction and distances are the four major global properties to be preserved in a map. But none of the projections can maintain all these properties simultaneously. Therefore, according to specific need, a projection can be drawn so that the desired quality may be retained. Thus, on the basis of global properties, projections are classified into equal area, orthomorphic, azimuthal and equi-distant projections. Equal Area
Projection is also called homolographic projection. It is that projection in which areas of various parts of the earth are represented correctly.
Orthomorphic or True-Shape projection is one in which shapes of various areas are portrayed correctly. The shape is generally maintained at the cost of the correctness of area. Azimuthal or True-Bearing projection is one on which the direction of all points from the centre is correctly represented. Equi-distant or True Scale projection is that where the distance or scale is correctly maintained. However, there is no such projection, which maintains the scale correctly throughout. It can be
Figure 4.2 A conical projection from a Globe to a Flat Map
Practical Work in Geography maintained correctly only along some selected parallels and meridians as per the requirement.
d. Source of Light: On the basis of location of source of light, projections may be classified as gnomonic, stereographic and orthographic. Gnomonic projection is obtained by putting the light at the centre of the globe. Stereographic projection is drawn when the source of light is placed at the periphery of the globe at a point diametrically opposite to the point at which the plane surface touches the globe. Orthographic projection is drawn when the source of light is placed at infinity from the globe, opposite to the point at which the plane surface touches the globe.
CONSTRUCTING SOME SELECTED PROJECTIONS a. Conical Projection with one Standard Parallel
A conical projection is one, which is drawn by projecting the image of the graticule of a globe on a developable cone, which touches the globe along a parallel of latitude called the standard parallel. As the cone touches the globe located along AB, the position of this parallel on the globe coinciding with that on the cone is taken as the standard parallel. The length of other parallels on either side of this parallel are distorted. (Fig. 4.3)
Construct a conical projection with one standard parallel for an area bounded by 10º N to 70º N latitude and 10º E to 130º E longitudes when the scale is 1:250,000,000 and latitudinal and longitudinal interval is 10º.
Calculation
Radius of reduced earth 56 . 2
000 , 000 , 250
000 , 000 , 640 = = R cm
Standard parallel is 40º N (10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70)
Central meridian is 70º E (10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100, 110,
120, 130)
Construction (i) Draw a circle or a quadrant of 2.56 cm radius marked with angles
COE as 10º interval and BOE and AOD as 40º standard parallel.
(ii) A tangent is extended from B to P and similarly from A to P, so that AP and BP are the two sides of the cone touching the globe and forming Standard Parallel at 40° N.
Map Projections (iii) The arc distance CE represents the interval between parallels.
A semi-circle is drawn by taking this arc distance.
(iv) X-Y is the perpendicular drawn from OP to OB.
(v) A separate line N-S is taken on which BP distance is drawn representing standard parallel. The line NS becomes the central meridian.
(vi) Other parallels are drawn by taking arc distance CE on the central meridian.
(vii) The distance XY is marked on the standard parallel at 40° for drawing other meridians.
(viii) Straight lines are drawn by joining them with the pole.
Properties
1. All the parallels are arcs of concentric circle and are equally spaced.
2. All meridians are straight lines merging at the pole. The meridians intersect the parallels at right angles.
3. The scale along all meridians is true, i.e. distances along the meridians are accurate.
4. An arc of a circle represents the pole.
5. The scale is true along the standard parallel but exaggerated away from the standard parallel.
6. Meridians become closer to each other towards the pole.
7. This projection is neither equal area nor orthomorphic.
Figure 4.3 Simple Conical Projection with one standard parallel
Practical Work in Geography
Limitations
1. It is not suitable for a world map due to extreme distortions in the hemisphere opposite the one in which the standard parallel is selected.
2. Even within the hemisphere, it is not suitable for representing larger areas as the distortion along the pole and near the equator is larger.
1. This projection is commonly used for showing areas of mid-latitudes with limited latitudinal and larger longitudinal extent.
2. A long narrow strip of land running parallel to the standard parallel and having east-west stretch is correctly shown on this projection.
3. Direction along standard parallel is used to show railways, roads, narrow river valleys and international boundaries.
4. This projection is suitable for showing the Canadian Pacific Railways,
Trans-Siberian Railways, international boundaries between USA and
Canada and the Narmada Valley.
b. Cylindrical Equal Area Projection
The cylindrical equal area projection, also known as the Lambert’s projection, has been derived by projecting the surface of the globe with parallel rays on a cylinder touching it at the equator. Both the parallels and meridians are projected as straight lines intersecting one another at right angles. The pole is shown with a parallel equal to the equator; hence, the shape of the area gets highly distorted at the higher latitude.
Construct a cylindrical equal area projection for the world when the R.F.
of the map is 1:300,000,000 taking latitudinal and longitudinal interval
Calculation
Radius of the reduced earth 1 . 2
000 , 000 , 300
000 , 000 , 640 = = R cm
Length of the equator 2πR or 2 22 2 1 13 2
Interval along the equator = 13 2 15 0 55
Map Projections
Construction
Draw a circle of 2.1 cm radius;
Mark the angles of 15º, 30º, 45º, 60º, 75º and 90º for both, northern and southern hemispheres;
Draw a line of 13.2 cm and divide it into 24 equal parts at a distance of 0.55cm apart. This line represents the equator;
Draw a line perpendicular to the equator at the point where 0° is meeting the circumference of the circle;
Extend all the parallels equal to the length of the equator from the perpendicular line; and
Complete the projection as shown in fig 4.4 below:
Properties
1. All parallels and meridians are straight lines intersecting each other at right angle.
2. Polar parallel is also equal to the equator.
3. Scale is true only along the equator.
Limitations
1. Distortion increases as we move towards the pole.
2. The projection is non-orthomorphic.
3. Equality of area is maintained at the cost of distortion in shape.
1. The projection is most suitable for the area lying between 45º N and S latitudes.
2. It is suitable to show the distribution of tropical crops like rice, tea, coffee, rubber and sugarcane.
Figure 4.4 Cylindrical Equal Area Projection
Practical Work in Geography c. Mercator’s Projection
A Dutch cartographer Mercator Gerardus Karmer developed this projection in 1569. The projection is based on mathematical formulae.
So, it is an orthomorphic projection in which the correct shape is maintained. The distance between parallels increases towards the pole.
Like cylindrical projection, the parallels and meridians intersect each other at right angle. It has the characteristics of showing correct directions. A straight line joining any two points on this projection gives a constant bearing, which is called a Laxodrome or Rhumb line.
Draw a Mercator’s projection for the world map on the scale of
1:250,000,000 at 15º interval.
Calculation
Radius of the reduced earth is inch R " 1
000 , 000 , 250
000 , 000 , 250 = =
Length of the equator 2πR or 1 22 2 6 28
7 . "inches
Interval along the equator = 6.28 15° 0 26
360° . "inches
Construction (i) Draw a line of 6.28" inches representing the equator as EQ:
(ii) Divide it into 24 equal parts. Determine the length of each division using the following formula:
Length of Equator interval (iii) Calculate the distance for latitude with the help of the table given below:-
Latitude Distance
15º 0.265 × 1 = 0.265" inch
30º 0.549 × 1 = 0.549" inch
45º 0.881 × 1 = 0.881" inch
60º 1.317 × 1 = 1.317" inches
75º 2.027 × 1 = 2.027" inches (iv) Complete the projection as shown in Fig. 4.5
Map Projections
Properties
1. All parallels and meridians are straight lines and they intersect each other at right angles.
2. All parallels have the same length which is equal to the length of equator.
3. All meridians have the same length and equal spacing. But they are longer than the corresponding meridian on the globe.
4. Spacing between parallels increases towards the pole.
5. Scale along the equator is correct as it is equal to the length of the equator on the globe; but other parallels are longer than the corresponding parallel on the globe; hence the scale is not correct along them. For example, the 30º parallel is 1.154 times longer than the corresponding parallel on the globe.
6. Shape of the area is maintained, but at the higher latitudes distortion takes place.
7. The shape of small countries near the equator is truly preserved while it increases towards poles.
8. It is an azimuthal projection.
9. This is an orthomorphic projection as scale along the meridian is equal to the scale along the parallel.
Limitations
1. There is greater exaggeration of scale along the parallels and meridians in high latitudes. As a result, size of the countries near
Figure 4.5 Mercator’s Projection
Practical Work in Geography the pole is highly exaggerated. For example, the size of Greenland equals to the size of USA, whereas it is 1/10th of USA.
2. Poles in this projection cannot be shown as 90º parallel and meridian touching them are infinite.
1. More suitable for a world map and widely used in preparing atlas
2. Very useful for navigation purposes showing sea routes and air
3. Drainage pattern, ocean currents, temperature, winds and their directions, distribution of worldwide rainfall and other weather elements are appropriately shown on this map
Figure 4.6 Straight lines are Laxodromes or Rhumb lines and
Dotted lines are great circles
Map Projections
EXERCISE
1. Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below:
A map projection least suitable for the world map:
(a) Mercator (b) Simple Cylindrical (c) Conical (d) All the above
A map projection that is neither the equal area nor the correct shape and even the directions are also incorrect (a) Simple Conical (b) Polar zenithal (c) Mercator (d) Cylindrical
A map projection having correct direction and correct shape but area greatly exaggerated polewards is (a) Cylindrical Equal Area (b) Mercator (c) Conical (d) All the above
When the source of light is placed at the centre of the globe, the resultant projection is called (a) Orthographic (b) Stereographic (c) Gnomonic (d) All the above
2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words:
Describe the elements of map projection.
What do you mean by global property?
Not a single map projection represents the globe truly. Why?
How is the area kept equal in cylindrical equal area projection?
3. Differentiate between—
Developable and non-developable surfaces
Homolographic and orthographic projections
Normal and oblique projections
Parallels of latitude and meridians of longitude
Practical Work in Geography
4. Answer the following questions in not more than 125 words:
Discuss the criteria used for classifying map projection and state the major characteristics of each type of projection.
Which map projection is very useful for navigational purposes?
Explain the properties and limitations of this projection.
Discuss the main properties of conical projection with one standard parallel and describe its major limitations.
ACTIVITY
Construct graticule for an area stretching between 30º N to 70º N and
40º E to 30º W on a simple conical projection with one standard parallel with a scale of 1:200,000,000 and interval at an 10º apart.
Prepare graticule for a Cylindrical Equal Area Projection for the world when R.F. is1: 150,000,000 and the interval is 15º apart.
Draw a Mercator Projection for the world map when the R.F. is
1:400,000,000 and the interval between the latitude and longitude is
Topographical Maps
Chapter 5
Topographical Maps
You know that the map is an important geographic tool. You also know that maps are classified on the basis of scale and functions.
The topographical maps, which have been referred to in Chapter 1 are of utmost importance to geographers. They serve the purpose of base maps and are used to draw all the other maps.
Topographical maps, also known as general purpose maps, are drawn at relatively large scales. These maps show important natural and cultural features such as relief, vegetation, water bodies, cultivated land, settlements, and transportation networks, etc.
These maps are prepared and published by the National Mapping
Organisation of each country. For example, the Survey of India prepares the topographical maps in India for the entire country.
The topographical maps are drawn in the form of series of maps at different scales. Hence, in the given series, all maps employ the same reference point, scale, projection, conventional signs, symbols and colours.
The topographical maps in India are prepared in two series, i.e.
India and Adjacent Countries Series and The International Map
Series of the World.
India and Adjacent Countries Series: Topographical maps under
India and Adjacent Countries Series were prepared by the Survey of India till the
