PHYSICS 20
Fig. 2.7 Motion of an object under free fall.
(a) Variation of acceleration with time.
(b) Variation of velocity with time.
(c) Variation of distance with time ⊳
Example 2.5 Galileo’s law of odd numbers : “The distances traversed, during equal intervals of time, by a body falling from rest, stand to one another in the same ratio as the odd numbers beginning with unity [namely, 1: 3: 5: 7…...].” Prove it.
Answer Let us divide the time interval of motion of an object under free fall into many equal intervals τ and find out the distances traversed during successive intervals of time. Since initial velocity is zero, we have
Using this equation, we can calculate the position of the object after different time intervals, 0, τ, 2τ, 3τ… which are given in second column of Table 2.2. If we take (–1/ 2) gτ2 as y0 — the position coordinate after first time interval τ, then third column gives the positions in the unit of yo. The fourth column gives the distances traversed in successive τs. We find that the distances are in the simple ratio 1: 3: 5: 7: 9: 11… as shown in the last column. This law was established by Galileo Galilei (1564-1642) who was the first to make quantitative studies of free fall. ⊳
Example 2.6 Stopping distance of vehicles : When brakes are applied to a moving vehicle, the distance it travels before stopping is called stopping distance. It is an important factor for road safety and depends on the initial velocity (v0) and the braking capacity, or deceleration, –a that is caused by the braking. Derive an expression for stopping distance of a vehicle in terms of vo and a.
Answer Let the distance travelled by the vehicle before it stops be ds. Then, using equation of motion v2 = vo
2 + 2 ax, and noting that v = 0, we have the stopping distance
Thus, the stopping distance is proportional to the square of the initial velocity. Doubling the
Table 2.2 y gt = − 1
Reprint 2026-27
MOTION IN A STRAIGHT LINE 21 initial velocity increases the stopping distance by a factor of 4 (for the same deceleration).
For the car of a particular make, the braking distance was found to be 10 m, 20 m, 34 m and
50 m corresponding to velocities of 11, 15, 20 and 25 m/s which are nearly consistent with the above formula.
Stopping distance is an important factor considered in setting speed limits, for example, in school zones. ⊳
Example 2.7 Reaction time : When a situation demands our immediate action, it takes some time before we really respond. Reaction time is the time a person takes to observe, think and act. For example, if a person is driving and suddenly a boy appears on the road, then the time elapsed before he slams the brakes of the car is the reaction time. Reaction time depends on complexity of the situation and on an individual.
You can measure your reaction time by a simple experiment. Take a ruler and ask your friend to drop it vertically through the gap between your thumb and forefinger (Fig. 2.8).
After you catch it, find the distance d travelled by the ruler. In a particular case, d was found to be 21.0 cm.
Estimate reaction time.
Answer The ruler drops under free fall.
Therefore, vo = 0, and a = – g = –9.8 m s–2. The distance travelled d and the reaction time tr are related by
Given d = 21.0 cm and g = 9.8 m s–2 the reaction
Fig. 2.8 Measuring the reaction time.
1. An object is said to be in motion if its position changes with time. The position of the object can be specified with reference to a conveniently chosen origin. For motion in a straight line, position to the right of the origin is taken as positive and to the left as negative.
The average speed of an object is greater or equal to the magnitude of the average velocity over a given time interval.
2. Instantaneous velocity or simply velocity is defined as the limit of the average velocity as the time interval ∆t becomes infinitesimally small :
d t 0 t 0 v lim v lim t t ∆ → ∆ →
The velocity at a particular instant is equal to the slope of the tangent drawn on position-time graph at that instant.
Reprint 2026-27
