PHYSICS 28 just as the ordinary numbers*. For example, if the length and breadth of a rectangle are
1.0 m and 0.5 m respectively, then its perimeter is the sum of the lengths of the four sides, 1.0 m + 0.5 m +1.0 m + 0.5 m =
3.0 m. The length of each side is a scalar and the perimeter is also a scalar. Take a n o t h e r e x a m p l e : t h e m a x i m u m a n d minimum temperatures on a particular day are 35.6 °C and 24.2 °C respectively. Then, the difference between the two temperatures is 11.4 °C. Similarly, if a uniform solid cube of aluminium of side 10 cm has a mass of
2.7 kg, then its volume is 10–3 m3 (a scalar)
and its density is 2.7×103 kg m–3 (a scalar).
A vector quantity is a quantity that has both a magnitude and a direction and obeys the triangle law of addition or equivalently the parallelogram law of addition. So, a vector is specified by giving its magnitude by a number and its direction. Some physical quantities that are represented by vectors are displacement, velocity, acceleration and force.
To represent a vector, we use a bold face type in this book. Thus, a velocity vector can be represented by a symbol v. Since bold face is difficult to produce, when written by hand, a vector is often represented by an arrow placed over a letter, say r v . Thus, both v and r represent the velocity vector. The magnitude of a vector is often called its absolute value, indicated by |v| = v. Thus, a vector is represented by a bold face, e.g. by A, a, p, q, r, ...
x, y, with respective magnitudes denoted by light face A, a, p, q, r, ... x, y.
3.2.1 Position and Displacement Vectors
To describe the position of an object moving in a plane, we need to choose a convenient point, say O as origin. Let P and P′ be the positions of the object at time t and t′, respectively [Fig. 3.1(a)].
We join O and P by a straight line. Then, OP is the position vector of the object at time t. An arrow is marked at the head of this line. It is represented by a symbol r, i.e. OP = r. Point P′ is represented by another position vector, OP′ denoted by r′. The length of the vector r represents the magnitude of the vector and its direction is the direction in which P lies as seen from O. If the object moves from P to P′, the vector PP′ (with tail at P and tip at P′) is called the displacement vector corresponding to motion from point P (at time t) to point P′ (at time t′).
Fig. 3.1 (a) Position and displacement vectors.
(b) Displacement vector PQ and different courses of motion.
It is important to note that displacement vector is the straight line joining the initial and final positions and does not depend on the actual path undertaken by the object between the two positions. For example, in Fig. 3.1(b), given the initial and final positions as P and Q, the displacement vector is the same PQ for different paths of journey, say PABCQ, PDQ, and PBEFQ.
Therefore, the magnitude of displacement is either less or equal to the path length of an object between two points. This fact was emphasised in the previous chapter also while discussing motion along a straight line.
3.2.2 Equality of Vectors
Two vectors A and B are said to be equal if, and only if, they have the same magnitude and the same direction.**
Figure 3.2(a) shows two equal vectors A and
B. We can easily check their equality. Shift B parallel to itself until its tail Q coincides with that of A, i.e. Q coincides with O. Then, since their tips S and P also coincide, the two vectors are said to be equal. In general, equality is indicated
* Addition and subtraction of scalars make sense only for quantities with same units. However, you can multiply and divide scalars of different units.
** In our study, vectors do not have fixed locations. So displacing a vector parallel to itself leaves the vector unchanged. Such vectors are called free vectors. However, in some physical applications, location or line of application of a vector is important. Such vectors are called localised vectors.
Reprint 2026-27
MOTION IN A PLANE 29 as A = B. Note that in Fig. 3.2(b), vectors A′ and
B′ have the same magnitude but they are not equal because they have different directions.
Even if we shift B′ parallel to itself so that its tail
Q′ coincides with the tail O′ of A′, the tip S′ of B′ does not coincide with the tip P′ of A′.
3.3 MULTIPLICATION OF VECTORS BY REAL
Multiplying a vector A with a positive number λ gives a vector whose magnitude is changed by the factor λ but the direction is the same as that
λ A = λ A if λ > 0.
For example, if A is multiplied by 2, the resultant vector 2A is in the same direction as A and has a magnitude twice of |A| as shown in Fig. 3.3(a).
Multiplying a vector A by a negative number
−λ gives another vector whose direction is opposite to the direction of A and whose magnitude is λ times |A|.
Multiplying a given vector A by negative numbers, say –1 and –1.5, gives vectors as shown in Fig 3.3(b).
The factor λ by which a vector A is multiplied could be a scalar having its own physical dimension. Then, the dimension of λ A is the product of the dimensions of λ and A. For example, if we multiply a constant velocity vector by duration (of time), we get a displacement
3.4 ADDITION AND SUBTRACTION OF
VECTORS — GRAPHICAL METHOD
As mentioned in section 4.2, vectors, by definition, obey the triangle law or equivalently, the parallelogram law of addition. We shall now describe this law of addition using the graphical method. Let us consider two vectors A and B that lie in a plane as shown in Fig. 3.4(a). The lengths of the line segments representing these vectors are proportional to the magnitude of the vectors.
To find the sum A + B, we place vector B so that its tail is at the head of the vector A, as in
Fig. 3.4(b). Then, we join the tail of A to the head of B. This line OQ represents a vector R, that is, the sum of the vectors A and B. Since, in this procedure of vector addition, vectors are
Fig. 3.2 (a) Two equal vectors A and B. (b) Two vectors A′ and B′ are unequal though they are of the same length.
Fig. 3.3 (a) Vector A and the resultant vector after multiplying A by a positive number 2.
(b) Vector A and resultant vectors after multiplying it by a negative number –1 and –1.5.
Fig. 3.4 (a) Vectors A and B. (b) Vectors A and B added graphically. (c) Vectors B and A added graphically. (d) Illustrating the associative law of vector addition.
Reprint 2026-27
