PHYSICS 66 directed upwards (not shown in the figure).
(ii) the force on the floor by the system (action); the force on the system by the floor (reaction). In addition, for (b), the force on the block by the cylinder and the force on the cylinder by the block also constitute an action-reaction pair.
The important thing to remember is that an action-reaction pair consists of mutual forces which are always equal and opposite between two bodies. Two forces on the same body which happen to be equal and opposite can never constitute an action-reaction pair. The force of gravity on the mass in (a) or (b) and the normal force on the mass by the floor are not action- reaction pairs. These forces happen to be equal and opposite for (a) since the mass is at rest.
They are not so for case (b), as seen already.
The weight of the system is 270 N, while the normal force R′ is 267.3 N. ⊳
The practice of drawing free-body diagrams is of great help in solving problems in mechanics.
It allows you to clearly define your system and consider all forces on the system due to objects that are not part of the system itself. A number of exercises in this and subsequent chapters will help you cultivate this practice.
1. Aristotle’s view that a force is necessary to keep a body in uniform motion is wrong. A force is necessary in practice to counter the opposing force of friction.
2. Galileo extrapolated simple observations on motion of bodies on inclined planes, and arrived at the law of inertia. Newton’s first law of motion is the same law rephrased thus: “Everybody continues to be in its state of rest or of uniform motion in a straight line, unless compelled by some external force to act otherwise”. In simple terms, the First Law is “If external force on a body is zero, its acceleration is zero”.
3. Momentum (p ) of a body is the product of its mass (m) and velocity (v) :
4. Newton’s second law of motion :
The rate of change of momentum of a body is proportional to the applied force and takes place in the direction in which the force acts. Thus where F is the net external force on the body and a its acceleration. We set the constant of proportionality k = 1 in SI units. Then
The SI unit of force is newton : 1 N = 1 kg m s-2.
(a) The second law is consistent with the First Law (F = 0 implies a = 0)
(b) It is a vector equation (c) It is applicable to a particle, and also to a body or a system of particles, provided F is the total external force on the system and a is the acceleration of the system as a whole.
(d) F at a point at a certain instant determines a at the same point at that instant.
That is the Second Law is a local law; a at an instant does not depend on the history of motion.
4. Impulse is the product of force and time which equals change in momentum.
The notion of impulse is useful when a large force acts for a short time to produce a measurable change in momentum. Since the time of action of the force is very short, one can assume that there is no appreciable change in the position of the body during the action of the impulsive force.
6. Newton’s third law of motion:
To every action, there is always an equal and opposite reaction
Reprint 2026-27
LAWS OF MOTION 67
In simple terms, the law can be stated thus :
Forces in nature always occur between pairs of bodies. Force on a body A by body
B is equal and opposite to the force on the body B by A.
Action and reaction forces are simultaneous forces. There is no cause-effect relation between action and reaction. Any of the two mutual forces can be called action and the other reaction. Action and reaction act on different bodies and so they cannot be cancelled out. The internal action and reaction forces between different parts of a body do, however, sum to zero.
7. Law of Conservation of Momentum
The total momentum of an isolated system of particles is conserved. The law follows from the second and third law of motion.
8. Friction
Frictional force opposes (impending or actual) relative motion between two surfaces in contact. It is the component of the contact force along the common tangent to the surface in contact. Static friction fs opposes impending relative motion; kinetic friction fk opposes actual relative motion. They are independent of the area of contact and satisfy the following approximate laws :
f f R s s s ≤ =
μs (co-efficient of static friction) and μk (co-efficient of kinetic friction) are constants characteristic of the pair of surfaces in contact. It is found experimentally that μk is less than μs .
POINTS TO PONDER
1. Force is not always in the direction of motion. Depending on the situation, F may be along v, opposite to v, normal to v or may make some other angle with v. In every case, it is parallel to acceleration.
2. If v = 0 at an instant, i.e. if a body is momentarily at rest, it does not mean that force or acceleration are necessarily zero at that instant. For example, when a ball thrown upward reaches its maximum height, v = 0 but the force continues to be its weight mg and the acceleration is not zero but g.
3. Force on a body at a given time is determined by the situation at the location of the body at that time. Force is not ‘carried’ by the body from its earlier history of motion. The moment after a stone is released out of an accelerated train, there is no horizontal force (or acceleration) on the stone, if the effects of the surrounding air are neglected. The stone then has only the vertical force of gravity.
4. In the second law of motion F = m a, F stands for the net force due to all material agencies external to the body. a is the effect of the force. ma should not be regarded as yet another force, besides F.
Reprint 2026-27
PHYSICS 68
5. The centripetal force should not be regarded as yet another kind of force. It is simply a name given to the force that provides inward radial acceleration to a body in circular motion. We should always look for some material force like tension, gravitational force, electrical force, friction, etc as the centripetal force in any circular motion.
6. Static friction is a self-adjusting force up to its limit ms N (fs £ ms N). Do not put fs= ms N without being sure that the maximum value of static friction is coming into play.
7. The familiar equation mg = R for a body on a table is true only if the body is in equilibrium. The two forces mg and R can be different (e.g. a body in an accelerated lift). The equality of mg and R has no connection with the third
8. The terms ‘action’ and ‘reaction’ in the third Law of Motion simply stand for simultaneous mutual forces between a pair of bodies. Unlike their meaning in ordinary language, action does not precede or cause reaction. Action and reaction act on different bodies.
9. The different terms like ‘friction’, ‘normal reaction’, ‘tension’, ‘air resistance’,
‘viscous drag’, ‘thrust’, ‘buoyancy’, ‘weight’, ‘centripetal force’ all stand for ‘force’ in different contexts. For clarity, every force and its equivalent terms encountered in mechanics should be reduced to the phrase ‘force on A by B’.
10. For applying the second law of motion, there is no conceptual distinction between inanimate and animate objects. An animate object such as a human also requires an external force to accelerate. For example, without the external force of friction, we cannot walk on the ground.
11. The objective concept of force in physics should not be confused with the subjective concept of the ‘feeling of force’. On a merry-go-around, all parts of our body are subject to an inward force, but we have a feeling of being pushed outward – the direction of impending motion.
EXERCISES (For simplicity in numerical calculations, take g = 10 m s-2)
4.1 Give the magnitude and direction of the net force acting on (a) a drop of rain falling down with a constant speed, (b) a cork of mass 10 g floating on water, (c) a kite skillfully held stationary in the sky, (d) a car moving with a constant velocity of 30 km/h on a rough road, (e) a high-speed electron in space far from all material objects, and free of electric and magnetic fields.
4.2 A pebble of mass 0.05 kg is thrown vertically upwards. Give the direction and magnitude of the net force on the pebble, (a) during its upward motion, (b) during its downward motion, (c) at the highest point where it is momentarily at rest. Do your answers change if the pebble was thrown at an angle of 45° with the horizontal direction?
Ignore air resistance.
4.3 Give the magnitude and direction of the net force acting on a stone of mass (a) just after it is dropped from the window of a stationary train, (b) just after it is dropped from the window of a train running at a constant velocity of 36 km/h, (c ) just after it is dropped from the window of a train accelerating with 1 m s-2, (d) lying on the floor of a train which is accelerating with 1 m s-2, the stone being at rest relative to the train.
Neglect air resistance throughout.
Reprint 2026-27
