Acids, Bases and Salts 21
Activity 2.6 Activity 2.6 Activity 2.6 Activity 2.6 Activity 2.6 n Take about 2 mL of dilute NaOH solution in a test tube and add two drops of phenolphthalein solution.
n What is the colour of the solution?
n Add dilute HCl solution to the above solution drop by drop.
n Is there any colour change for the reaction mixture?
n Why did the colour of phenolphthalein change after the addition of an acid?
n Now add a few drops of NaOH to the above mixture.
n Does the pink colour of phenolphthalein reappear?
n Why do you think this has happened?
On passing excess carbon dioxide the following reaction takes place:
CaCO s Ca(HCO aq 3 3 ( ) ) ( ) + → H O(l)+ CO (g) 2 2 2 (Soluble in water)
Limestone, chalk and marble are different forms of calcium carbonate.
All metal carbonates and hydrogencarbonates react with acids to give a corresponding salt, carbon dioxide and water.
Thus, the reaction can be summarised as –
In the above Activity, we have observed that the effect of a base is nullified by an acid and vice-versa. The reaction taking place is written as –
NaOH(aq) + HCl(aq) → NaCl(aq) + H2O(l)
The reaction between an acid and a base to give a salt and water is known as a neutralisation reaction. In general, a neutralisation reaction can be written as –
Base + Acid → Salt + Water
2.1.5 Reaction of Metallic Oxides with Acids
Activity 2.7 Activity 2.7 Activity 2.7 Activity 2.7 Activity 2.7 n Take a small amount of copper oxide in a beaker and add dilute hydrochloric acid slowly while stirring.
n Note the colour of the solution. What has happened to the copper
You will notice that the colour of the solution becomes blue-green and the copper oxide dissolves. The blue-green colour of the solution is due to the formation of copper(II) chloride in the reaction. The general reaction between a metal oxide and an acid can be written as –
Metal oxide + Acid → Salt + Water
Metal carbonate/Metal hydrogencarbonate + Acid → Salt + Carbon dioxide + Water
2.1.4 How do Acids and Bases React with each other?
Reprint 2026-27
