Life Processes 83
Now, let us study how the plant obtains carbon dioxide. In Class IX, we had talked about stomata (Fig. 5.3)
which are tiny pores present on the surface of the leaves. Massive amounts of gaseous exchange takes place in the leaves through these pores for the purpose of photosynthesis. But it is important to note here that exchange of gases occurs across the surface of stems, roots and leaves as well. Since large amounts of water can also be lost through these stomata, the plant closes these pores when it does not need carbon dioxide for photosynthesis. The opening and closing of the pore is a function of the guard cells. The guard cells swell when water flows into them, causing the stomatal pore to open. Similarly the pore closes if the guard cells shrink.
n Take two healthy potted plants which are nearly the same size.
n Keep them in a dark room for three days.
n Now place each plant on separate glass plates. Place a watch-glass containing potassium hydroxide by the side of one of the plants. The potassium hydroxide is used to absorb carbon dioxide.
n Cover both plants with separate bell-jars as shown in Fig. 5.4.
n Use vaseline to seal the bottom of the jars to the glass plates so that the set-up is air-tight.
n Keep the plants in sunlight for about two hours.
n Pluck a leaf from each plant and check for the presence of starch as in the above activity.
n Do both the leaves show the presence of the same amount of starch?
n What can you conclude from this activity?
Figure 5.3 Figure 5.3 Figure 5.3 Figure 5.3 Figure 5.3 (a) Open and (b) closed stomatal pore
Activity 5.2 Activity 5.2 Activity 5.2 Activity 5.2 Activity 5.2
Based on the two activities performed above, can we design an experiment to demonstrate that sunlight is essential for photosynthesis?
So far, we have talked about how autotrophs meet their energy requirements. But they also need other raw materials for building their body. Water used in photosynthesis is taken up from the soil by the roots in terrestrial plants. Other materials like nitrogen, phosphorus, iron and magnesium are taken up from the soil. Nitrogen is an essential element used in the synthesis of proteins and other compounds. This is
Figure 5.4 Experimental set-up (a) with potassium hydroxide (b) without potassium hydroxide
Reprint 2026-27
Science 84 taken up in the form of inorganic nitrates or nitrites. Or it is taken up as organic compounds which have been prepared by bacteria from atmospheric nitrogen.
5.2.2 Heterotrophic Nutrition
Each organism is adapted to its environment. The form of nutrition differs depending on the type and availability of food material as well as how it is obtained by the organism. For example, whether the food source is stationary (such as grass) or mobile (such as a deer), would allow for differences in how the food is accessed and what is the nutritive apparatus used by a cow and a lion. There is a range of strategies by which the food is taken in and used by the organism. Some organisms break-down the food material outside the body and then absorb it.
Examples are fungi like bread moulds, yeast and mushrooms. Others take in whole material and break it down inside their bodies. What can be taken in and broken down depends on the body design and functioning. Some other organisms derive nutrition from plants or animals without killing them. This parasitic nutritive strategy is used by a wide variety of organisms like cuscuta (amar-bel), ticks, lice, leeches and tape-worms.
5.2.3 How do Organisms obtain their Nutrition?
Since the food and the way it is obtained differ, the digestive system is different in various organisms. In single-celled organisms, the food may be taken in by the entire surface. But as the complexity of the organism increases, different parts become specialised to perform different functions. For example, Amoeba takes in food using temporary finger-like extensions of the cell surface which fuse over the food particle forming a food-vacuole (Fig. 5.5). Inside the food- vacuole, complex substances are broken down into simpler ones which then diffuse into the cytoplasm. The remaining undigested material is moved to the surface of the cell and thrown out. In
Paramoecium, which is also a unicellular organism, the cell has a definite shape and food is taken in at a specific spot. Food is moved to this spot by the movement of cilia which cover the entire surface of the cell.
5.2.4 Nutrition in Human Beings
The alimentary canal is basically a long tube extending from the mouth to the anus. In Fig. 5.6, we can see that the tube has different parts.
Various regions are specialised to perform different functions. What happens to the food once it enters our body? We shall discuss this process here.
Figure 5.5 Figure 5.5 Figure 5.5 Figure 5.5 Figure 5.5
Nutrition in Amoeba
Reprint 2026-27
Life Processes 85
Activity 5.3 Activity 5.3 Activity 5.3 Activity 5.3 Activity 5.3 n Take 1 mL starch solution (1%) in two test tubes (A and B).
n Add 1 mL saliva to test tube A and leave both test tubes undisturbed for 20-30 minutes.
n Now add a few drops of dilute iodine solution to the test tubes.
n In which test tube do you observe a colour change?
n What does this indicate about the presence or absence of starch in the two test tubes?
n What does this tell us about the action of saliva on starch?
We eat various types of food which has to pass through the same digestive tract. Naturally the food has to be processed to generate particles which are small and of the same texture. This is achieved by crushing the food with our teeth. Since the lining of the canal is soft, the food is also wetted to make its passage smooth. When we eat something we like, our mouth ‘waters’. This is actually not only water, but a fluid called saliva secreted by the salivary glands. Another aspect of the food we ingest is its complex nature. If it is to be absorbed from the alimentary canal, it has to be broken into smaller molecules. This is done with the help of biological catalysts called enzymes. The saliva contains an enzyme called salivary amylase that breaks down starch which is a complex molecule to give simple sugar. The food is mixed thoroughly with saliva and moved around the mouth while chewing by the muscular tongue.
It is necessary to move the food in a regulated manner along the digestive tube so that it can be processed properly in each part. The lining of canal has muscles that contract rhythmically in order to push the food forward. These peristaltic movements occur all along the gut.
From the mouth, the food is taken to the stomach through the food-pipe or oesophagus. The stomach is a large organ which expands when food enters it. The muscular walls of the stomach help in mixing the food thoroughly with more digestive juices.
The digestion in stomach is taken care of by the gastric glands present in the wall of the stomach. These release hydrochloric acid, a protein digesting enzyme called pepsin, and mucus. The hydrochloric acid creates an acidic medium which facilitates the action of the enzyme pepsin. What other function do you think is served by the acid? The mucus protects the inner lining of the stomach from the action of the acid under normal conditions. We
Figure 5.6 Figure 5.6 Figure 5.6 Figure 5.6 Figure 5.6 Human alimentary canal
Reprint 2026-27
Science 86 have often heard adults complaining about ‘acidity’. Can this be related to what has been discussed above?
The exit of food from the stomach is regulated by a sphincter muscle which releases it in small amounts into the small intestine. From the stomach, the food now enters the small intestine. This is the longest part of the alimentary canal which is fitted into a compact space because of extensive coiling. The length of the small intestine differs in various animals depending on the food they eat. Herbivores eating grass need a longer small intestine to allow the cellulose to be digested. Meat is easier to digest, hence carnivores like tigers have a shorter small intestine.
The small intestine is the site of the complete digestion of carbohydrates, proteins and fats. It receives the secretions of the liver and pancreas for this purpose. The food coming from the stomach is acidic and has to be made alkaline for the pancreatic enzymes to act.
Bile juice from the liver accomplishes this in addition to acting on fats.
Fats are present in the intestine in the form of large globules which makes it difficult for enzymes to act on them. Bile salts break them down into smaller globules increasing the efficiency of enzyme action. This is similar to the emulsifying action of soaps on dirt that we have learnt about in
Chapter 4. The pancreas secretes pancreatic juice which contains enzymes like trypsin for digesting proteins and lipase for breaking down emulsified fats. The walls of the small intestine contain glands which secrete intestinal juice. The enzymes present in it finally convert the proteins to amino acids, complex carbohydrates into glucose and fats into fatty acids and glycerol.
Digested food is taken up by the walls of the intestine. The inner lining of the small intestine has numerous finger-like projections called villi which increase the surface area for absorption. The villi are richly supplied with blood vessels which take the absorbed food to each and every cell of the body, where it is utilised for obtaining energy, building up new tissues and the repair of old tissues.
The unabsorbed food is sent into the large intestine where its wall absorb more water from this material. The rest of the material is removed from the body via the anus. The exit of this waste material is regulated by the anal sphincter.
More to Know!
Dental caries
Dental caries or tooth decay causes gradual softening of enamel and dentine. It begins when bacteria acting on sugars produce acids that softens or demineralises the enamel.
Masses of bacterial cells together with food particles stick to the teeth to form dental plaque. Saliva cannot reach the tooth surface to neutralise the acid as plaque covers the teeth. Brushing the teeth after eating removes the plaque before the bacteria produce acids. If untreated, microorganisms may invade the pulp, causing inflammation and infection.
Reprint 2026-27
Life Processes 87
5.3 RESPIR 5.3 RESPIR 5.3 RESPIR 5.3 RESPIR 5.3 RESPIRA A A A ATION TION TION TION TION
Activity 5.4 Activity 5.4 Activity 5.4 Activity 5.4 Activity 5.4 n Take some freshly prepared lime water in a test tube.
n Blow air through this lime water.
n Note how long it takes for the lime water to turn milky.
n Use a syringe or pichkari to pass air through some fresh lime water taken in another test tube (Fig. 5.7).
n Note how long it takes for this lime water to turn milky.
n What does this tell us about the amount of carbon dioxide in the air that we breathe out?
1. What are the differences between autotrophic nutrition and heterotrophic nutrition?
2. Where do plants get each of the raw materials required for photosynthesis?
3. What is the role of the acid in our stomach?
4. What is the function of digestive enzymes?
5. How is the small intestine designed to absorb digested food?
Test tube containing lime water Lime
Pichkari
Q U E S T I O N S
Activity 5.5 Activity 5.5 Activity 5.5 Activity 5.5 Activity 5.5 n Take some fruit juice or sugar solution and add some yeast to this. Take this mixture in a test tube fitted with a one-holed cork.
n Fit the cork with a bent glass tube. Dip the free end of the glass tube into a test tube containing freshly prepared lime water.
n What change is observed in the lime water and how long does it take for this change to occur?
n What does this tell us about the products of fermentation?
We have discussed nutrition in organisms in the last section. The food material taken in during the process of nutrition is used in cells to provide energy for various life processes. Diverse organisms do this in different ways – some use oxygen to break-down glucose completely into carbon dioxide and water, some use other pathways that do not involve oxygen (Fig. 5.8). In all cases, the first step is the break-down of glucose, a six-carbon molecule, into a three-carbon molecule called pyruvate. This process takes place in the cytoplasm. Further, the pyruvate may be converted into ethanol and carbon dioxide. This process takes place in yeast during fermentation. Since this process takes place in the absence of air (oxygen), it is called anaerobic respiration. Break- down of pyruvate using oxygen takes place in the mitochondria. This
Figure 5.7 Figure 5.7 Figure 5.7 Figure 5.7 Figure 5.7 (a) Air being passed into lime water with a pichkari/ syringe, (b) air being exhaled into lime water
Reprint 2026-27
Science 88 process breaks up the three-carbon pyruvate molecule to give three molecules of carbon dioxide. The other product is water. Since this process takes place in the presence of air (oxygen), it is called aerobic respiration. The release of energy in this aerobic process is a lot greater than in the anaerobic process. Sometimes, when there is a lack of oxygen in our muscle cells, another pathway for the break-down of pyruvate is taken. Here the pyruvate is converted into lactic acid which is also a three-carbon molecule. This build-up of lactic acid in our muscles during sudden activity causes cramps.
Figure 5.8 Figure 5.8 Figure 5.8 Figure 5.8 Figure 5.8 Break-down of glucose by various pathways
The energy released during cellular respiration is immediately used to synthesise a molecule called ATP which is used to fuel all other activities in the cell. In these processes, ATP is broken down giving rise to a fixed amount of energy which can drive the endothermic reactions taking place in the cell.
ATP is the energy currency for most cellular processes. The energy released during the process of respiration is used to make an ATP molecule from ADP and inorganic phosphate.
Endothermic processes in the cell then use this ATP to drive the reactions. When the terminal phosphate linkage in ATP is broken using water, the energy equivalent to
30.5 kJ/mol is released.
Think of how a battery can provide energy for many different kinds of uses. It can be used to obtain mechanical energy, light energy, electrical energy and so on. Similarly,
ATP can be used in the cells for the contraction of muscles, protein synthesis, conduction of nervous impulses and many other activities.
Since the aerobic respiration pathway depends on oxygen, aerobic organisms need to ensure that there is sufficient intake of oxygen. We have seen that plants exchange gases through stomata, and the large inter-cellular spaces ensure that all cells are in contact with air. Carbon dioxide and oxygen are exchanged by diffusion here. They can go into
More to Know!
Reprint 2026-27
Life Processes 89 cells, or away from them and out into the air. The direction of diffusion depends upon the environmental conditions and the requirements of the plant. At night, when there is no photosynthesis occurring, CO2 elimination is the major exchange activity going on. During the day,
CO2 generated during respiration is used up for photosynthesis, hence there is no CO2 release. Instead, oxygen release is the major event at this time.
Animals have evolved different organs for the uptake of oxygen from the environment and for getting rid of the carbon dioxide produced. Terrestrial animals can breathe the oxygen in the atmosphere, but animals that live in water need to use the oxygen dissolved in water.
Activity 5.6 Activity 5.6 Activity 5.6 Activity 5.6 Activity 5.6 n Observe fish in an aquarium. They open and close their mouths and the gill-slits (or the operculum which covers the gill-slits)
behind their eyes also open and close. Are the timings of the opening and closing of the mouth and gill-slits coordinated in some n Count the number of times the fish opens and closes its mouth in a minute.
n Compare this to the number of times you breathe in and out in a
Since the amount of dissolved oxygen is fairly low compared to the amount of oxygen in the air, the rate of breathing in aquatic organisms is much faster than that seen in terrestrial organisms.
Fishes take in water through their mouths and force it past the gills where the dissolved oxygen is taken up by blood.
Terrestrial organisms use the oxygen in the atmosphere for respiration. This oxygen is absorbed by different organs in different animals. All these organs have a structure that increases the surface area which is in contact with the oxygen-rich atmosphere. Since the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide has to take place across this surface, this surface is very fine and delicate. In order to protect this surface, it is usually placed within the body, so there have to be passages that will take air to this area. In addition, there is a mechanism for moving the air in and out of this area where the oxygen is absorbed.
In human beings (Fig. 5.9), air is taken into the body through the nostrils. The air passing through the nostrils is filtered by fine hairs that line the passage. The passage is also lined with mucus which helps in this process. From here, the air passes through the throat and into the lungs. Rings of cartilage are present in the throat. These ensure that the air-passage does not collapse.
Using tobacco directly or any product of tobacco in the form of cigar, cigarettes, bidis, hookah, gutkha, etc., is harmful. Use of tobacco most commonly affects the tongue, lungs, heart and liver. Smokeless tobacco is also a major risk factor for heart attacks, strokes, pulmonary diseases and several forms of cancers.
There is a high incidence of oral cancer in India due to the chewing of tobacco in the form of gutkha. Stay healthy; just say NO to tobacco and its products!
More to Know!
Reprint 2026-27
Science 90
Within the lungs, the passage divides into smaller and smaller tubes which finally terminate in balloon-like
