How do Organisms Reproduce? 117
Figure 7.3 Figure 7.3 Figure 7.3 Figure 7.3 Figure 7.3 Regeneration in Planaria take place in an organised sequence referred to as development. However, regeneration is not the same as reproduction, since most organisms would not normally depend on being cut up to be able to reproduce.
7.2.4 Budding
Organisms such as Hydra use regenerative cells for reproduction in the process of budding. In Hydra, a bud develops as an outgrowth due to repeated cell division at one specific site (Fig. 7.4). These buds develop into tiny individuals and when fully mature, detach from the parent body and become new independent individuals.
Figure 7.4 Figure 7.4 Figure 7.4 Figure 7.4 Figure 7.4 Budding in Hydra
7.2.5 Vegetative Propagation
There are many plants in which parts like the root, stem and leaves develop into new plants under appropriate conditions. Unlike in most animals, plants can indeed use such a mode for reproduction. This property of vegetative propagation is used in methods such as layering or grafting to grow many plants like sugarcane, roses, or grapes for agricultural purposes. Plants raised by vegetative propagation can bear flowers and fruits earlier than those produced from seeds. Such methods also make possible the propagation of plants such as banana, orange, rose and jasmine that have lost the capacity to produce seeds. Another advantage of vegetative propagation is that all plants produced are genetically similar enough to the parent plant to have all its characteristics.
Reprint 2026-27
Science 118
Similarly buds produced in the notches along the leaf margin of Bryophyllum fall on the soil and develop into new plants (Fig. 7.5).
Activity 7.6 Activity 7.6 Activity 7.6 Activity 7.6 Activity 7.6 n Select a money-plant.
n Cut some pieces such that they contain at least one leaf.
n Cut out some other portions between two leaves.
n Dip one end of all the pieces in water and observe over the next few days.
n Which ones grow and give rise to fresh leaves?
n What can you conclude from your observations?
Tissue culture
In tissue culture, new plants are grown by removing tissue or separating cells from the growing tip of a plant. The cells are then placed in an artificial medium where they divide rapidly to form a small group of cells or callus. The callus is transferred to another medium containing hormones for growth and differentiation. The plantlets are then placed in the soil so that they can grow into mature plants. Using tissue culture, many plants can be grown from one parent in disease-free conditions. This technique is commonly used for ornamental plants.
7.2.6 Spore Formation
Even in many simple multi-cellular organisms, specific reproductive parts can be identified. The thread-like structures that developed on the bread in Activity 7.2 above are the hyphae of the bread mould (Rhizopus). They are not reproductive parts. On the other hand, the tiny blob-on-a-stick structures are involved in reproduction. The blobs are sporangia, which contain cells, or spores, that can eventually develop into new Rhizopus individuals (Fig. 7.6). The spores are covered by thick walls that protect them until they come into contact with another moist surface and can begin to grow.
Figure 7.6 Figure 7.6 Figure 7.6 Figure 7.6 Figure 7.6
Spore formation in Rhizopus
Activity 7.5 Activity 7.5 Activity 7.5 Activity 7.5 Activity 7.5 n Take a potato and observe its surface. Can notches be seen?
n Cut the potato into small pieces such that some pieces contain a notch or bud and some do not.
n Spread some cotton on a tray and wet it. Place the potato pieces on this cotton. Note where the pieces with the buds are placed.
n Observe changes taking place in these potato pieces over the next few days. Make sure that the cotton is kept moistened.
n Which are the potato pieces that give rise to fresh green shoots and roots?
Figure 7.5 Figure 7.5 Figure 7.5 Figure 7.5 Figure 7.5
Leaf of Bryophyllum with buds
More to Know?
Reprint 2026-27
How do Organisms Reproduce? 119
All the modes of reproduction that we have discussed so far allow new generations to be created from a single individual. This is known as asexual reproduction.
Q U E S T I O N S
1. How does binary fission differ from multiple fission?
2. How will an organism be benefited if it reproduces through spores?
3. Can you think of reasons why more complex organisms cannot give rise to new individuals through regeneration?
4. Why is vegetative propagation practised for growing some types of
5. Why is DNA copying an essential part of the process of reproduction?
7.3 SEXUAL REPRODUCTION 7.3 SEXUAL REPRODUCTION 7.3 SEXUAL REPRODUCTION 7.3 SEXUAL REPRODUCTION 7.3 SEXUAL REPRODUCTION
We are also familiar with modes of reproduction that depend on the involvement of two individuals before a new generation can be created.
Bulls alone cannot produce new calves, nor can hens alone produce new chicks. In such cases, both sexes, males and females, are needed to produce new generations. What is the significance of this sexual mode of reproduction? Are there any limitations of the asexual mode of reproduction, which we have been discussing above?
7.3.1 Why the Sexual Mode of Reproduction?
The creation of two new cells from one involves copying of the DNA as well as of the cellular apparatus. The DNA copying mechanism, as we have noted, cannot be absolutely accurate, and the resultant errors are a source of variations in populations of organisms. Every individual organism cannot be protected by variations, but in a population, variations are useful for ensuring the survival of the species. It would therefore make sense if organisms came up with reproductive modes that allowed more and more variation to be generated.
While DNA-copying mechanisms are not absolutely accurate, they are precise enough to make the generation of variation a fairly slow process. If the DNA copying mechanisms were to be less accurate, many of the resultant DNA copies would not be able to work with the cellular apparatus, and would die. So how can the process of making variants be speeded up? Each new variation is made in a DNA copy that already has variations accumulated from previous generations. Thus, two different individuals in a population would have quite different patterns of accumulated variations. Since all of these variations are in living individuals, it is assured that they do not have any really bad effects.
Combining variations from two or more individuals would thus create new combinations of variants. Each combination would be novel, since it would involve two different individuals. The sexual mode of
Reprint 2026-27
Science 120 reproduction incorporates such a process of combining DNA from two different individuals during reproduction.
But this creates a major difficulty. If each new generation is to be the combination of the DNA copies from two pre-existing individuals, then each new generation will end up having twice the amount of DNA that the previous generation had. This is likely to mess up the control of the cellular apparatus by the DNA. How many ways can we think of for solving this difficulty?
We have seen earlier that as organisms become more complex, the specialisation of tissue increases. One solution that many multi-cellular organisms have found for the problem mentioned above is to have special lineages of cells in specialised organs in which only half the number of chromosomes and half the amount of DNA as compared to the non- reproductive body cells. This is achieved by a process of cell division called meiosis. Thus, when these germ-cells from two individuals combine during sexual reproduction to form a new individual, it results in re- establishment of the number of chromosomes and the DNA content in the new generation.
If the zygote is to grow and develop into an organism which has highly specialised tissues and organs, then it has to have sufficient stores of energy for doing this. In very simple organisms, it is seen that the two germ-cells are not very different from one another, or may even be similar.
But as the body designs become more complex, the germ-cells also specialise. One germ-cell is large and contains the food-stores while the other is smaller and likely to be motile. Conventionally, the motile germ- cell is called the male gamete and the germ-cell containing the stored food is called the female gamete. We shall see in the next few sections how the need to create these two different types of gametes give rise to differences in the male and female reproductive organs and, in some cases, differences in the bodies of the male and female organisms.
7.3.2 Sexual Reproduction in Flowering Plants
The reproductive parts of angiosperms are located in the flower. You have already studied the different parts of a flower – sepals, petals, stamens and pistil. Stamens and pistil are the reproductive parts of a flower which contain the germ-cells. What possible functions could the petals and sepals serve?
The flower may be unisexual (papaya, watermelon) when it contains either stamens or pistil or bisexual (Hibiscus, mustard)
when it contains both stamens and pistil.
Stamen is the male reproductive part and it produces pollen grains that are yellowish in colour. You must have seen this yellowish powder that often sticks to our hands if we touch the stamen of a flower. Pistil is present in the centre of a flower and is the female reproductive part. It is made of three parts.
Figure 7.7 Figure 7.7 Figure 7.7 Figure 7.7 Figure 7.7
Longitudinal section of
Reprint 2026-27
How do Organisms Reproduce? 121
Figure 7.8 Figure 7.8 Figure 7.8 Figure 7.8 Figure 7.8
Germination of pollen on
The swollen bottom part is the ovary, middle elongated part is the style and the terminal part which may be sticky is the stigma. The ovary contains ovules and each ovule has an egg cell. The male germ-cell produced by pollen grain fuses with the female gamete present in the ovule. This fusion of the germ-cells or fertilisation gives us the zygote which is capable of growing into a new plant.
Thus the pollen needs to be transferred from the stamen to the stigma. If this transfer of pollen occurs in the same flower, it is referred to as self-pollination. On the other hand, if the pollen is transferred from one flower to another, it is known as cross- pollination. This transfer of pollen from one flower to another is achieved by agents like wind, water or animals.
After the pollen lands on a suitable stigma, it has to reach the female germ-cells which are in the ovary. For this, a tube grows out of the pollen grain and travels through the style to reach the
After fertilisation, the zygote divides several times to form an embryo within the ovule. The ovule develops a tough coat and is gradually converted into a seed. The ovary grows rapidly and ripens to form a fruit. Meanwhile, the petals, sepals, stamens, style and stigma may shrivel and fall off. Have you ever observed any flower part still persisting in the fruit? Try and work out the advantages of seed-formation for the plant. The seed contains the future plant or embryo which develops into a seedling under appropriate conditions. This process is known as germination.
Activity 7.7 Activity 7.7 Activity 7.7 Activity 7.7 Activity 7.7 n Soak a few seeds of Bengal gram (chana)
and keep them overnight.
n Drain the excess water and cover the seeds with a wet cloth and leave them for a day.
Make sure that the seeds do not become dry.
n Cut open the seeds carefully and observe the different parts.
n Compare your observations with the Fig. 7.9 and see if you can identify all the parts.
7.3.3 Reproduction in Human Beings
So far, we have been discussing the variety of modes that different species use for reproduction. Let us now look at the species that we are most interested in, namely, humans. Humans use a sexual mode of reproduction. How does this process work?
Let us begin at an apparently unrelated point. All of us know that our bodies change as we become older. You have learnt changes that take place in your body earlier in Class VIII also. We notice that our height has increased continuously from early age till now. We acquire teeth, we even lose the old, so-called milk teeth and acquire new ones.
Figure 7.9 Figure 7.9 Figure 7.9 Figure 7.9 Figure 7.9
Germination
Reprint 2026-27
Science 122
All of these are changes that can be grouped under the general process of growth, in which the body becomes larger. But in early teenage years, a whole new set of changes occurs that cannot be explained simply as body enlargement. Instead, the appearance of the body changes.
Proportions change, new features appear, and so do new sensations.
Some of these changes are common to both boys and girls. We begin to notice thick hair growing in new parts of the body such as armpits and the genital area between the thighs, which can also become darker in colour. Thinner hair can also appear on legs and arms, as well as on the face. The skin frequently becomes oily and we might begin to develop pimples. We begin to be conscious and aware of both our own bodies and those of others in new ways.
On the other hand, there are also changes taking place that are different between boys and girls. In girls, breast size begins to increase, with darkening of the skin of the nipples at the tips of the breasts. Also, girls begin to menstruate at around this time. Boys begin to have new thick hair growth on the face and their voices begin to crack. Further, the penis occasionally begins to become enlarged and erect, either in daydreams or at night.
All of these changes take place slowly, over a period of months and years. They do not happen all at the same time in one person, nor do they happen at an exact age. In some people, they happen early and quickly, while in others, they can happen slowly. Also, each change does not become complete quickly either. So, for example, thick hair on the face in boys appears as a few scattered hairs first, and only slowly does the growth begin to become uniform. Even so, all these changes show differences between people. Just as we have differently shaped noses or fingers, so also we have different patterns of hair growth, or size and shape of breast or penis. All of these changes are aspects of the sexual maturation of the body.
Why does the body show sexual maturation at this age? We have talked about the need for specialised cell types in multi-cellular bodies to carry out specialised functions. The creation of germ-cells to participate in sexual reproduction is another specialised function, and we have seen that plants develop special cell and tissue types to create them. Human beings also develop special tissues for this purpose. However, while the body of the individual organism is growing to its adult size, the resources of the body are mainly directed at achieving this growth. While that is happening, the maturation of the reproductive tissue is not likely to be a major priority. Thus, as the rate of general body growth begins to slow down, reproductive tissues begin to mature. This period during adolescence is called puberty.
So how do all the changes that we have talked about link to the reproductive process? We must remember that the sexual mode of reproduction means that germ-cells from two individuals have to join together. This can happen by the external release of germ-cells from the bodies of individuals, as happens in flowering plants. Or it can happen by two individuals joining their bodies together for internal transfer of germ-cells for fusion, as happens in many animals. If animals are to
Reprint 2026-27
How do Organisms Reproduce? 123 participate in this process of mating, their state of sexual maturity must be identifiable by other individuals. Many changes during puberty, such as new hair-growth patterns, are signals that sexual maturation is taking
On the other hand, the actual transfer of germ-cells between two people needs special organs for the sexual act, such as the penis when it is capable of becoming erect. In mammals such as humans, the baby is carried in the mother’s body for a long period, and will be breast-fed later. The female reproductive organs and breasts will need to mature to accommodate these possibilities. Let us look at the systems involved in the process of sexual reproduction.
7.3.3 (a) Male Reproductive System
The male reproductive system (Fig. 7.10)
consists of portions which produce the germ-cells and other portions that deliver the germ-cells to the site of fertilisation.
The formation of germ-cells or sperms takes place in the testes. These are located outside the abdominal cavity in scrotum because sperm formation requires a lower temperature than the normal body temperature. We have discussed the role of the testes in the secretion of the hormone, testosterone, in the previous chapter. In addition to regulating the formation of sperms, testosterone brings about changes in appearance seen in boys at the time of puberty.
The sperms formed are delivered through the vas deferens which unites with a tube coming from the urinary bladder. The urethra thus forms a common passage for both the sperms and urine. Along the path of the vas deferens, glands like the prostate and the seminal vesicles add their secretions so that the sperms are now in a fluid which makes their transport easier and this fluid also provides nutrition. The sperms are tiny bodies that consist of mainly genetic material and a long tail that helps them to move towards the female germ-cell.
7.3.3 (b) Female Reproductive System
The female germ-cells or eggs are made in the ovaries. They are also responsible for the production of some hormones. Look at
Fig. 7.11 and identify the various organs in the female reproductive system.
Figure 7.10 Figure 7.10 Figure 7.10 Figure 7.10 Figure 7.10 Human – male reproductive system
Figure 7.11 Figure 7.11 Figure 7.11 Figure 7.11
