Magnetic Effects of Electric Current 199
What happens to the deflection of the compass needle placed at a given point if the current in the copper wire is changed? To see this, vary the current in the wire. We find that the deflection in the needle also changes. In fact, if the current is increased, the deflection also increases.
It indicates that the magnitude of the magnetic field produced at a given point increases as the current through the wire increases.
What happens to the deflection of the needle if the compass is moved away from the copper wire but the current through the wire remains the same? To see this, now place the compass at a farther point from the conducting wire (say at point Q). What change do you observe? We see that the deflection in the needle decreases. Thus the magnetic field produced by a given current in the conductor decreases as the distance from it increases. From Fig. 12.6, it can be noticed that the concentric circles representing the magnetic field around a current-carrying straight wire become larger and larger as we move away from it.
12.2.2 Right-Hand Thumb Rule
A convenient way of finding the direction of magnetic field associated with a current-carrying conductor is given in Fig. 12.7.
n Connect the copper wire vertically between the points X and Y, as shown in Fig. 12.6 (a), in series with the battery, a plug and key.
n Sprinkle some iron filings uniformly on the cardboard. (You may use a salt sprinkler for this purpose.)
n Keep the variable of the rheostat at a fixed position and note the current through the ammeter.
n Close the key so that a current flows through the wire. Ensure that the copper wire placed between the points X and Y remains vertically straight.
n Gently tap the cardboard a few times. Observe the pattern of the iron filings. You would find that the iron filings align themselves showing a pattern of concentric circles around the copper wire (Fig. 12.6).
n What do these concentric circles represent?
They represent the magnetic field lines.
n How can the direction of the magnetic field be found? Place a compass at a point (say P) over a circle. Observe the direction of the needle. The direction of the north pole of the compass needle would give the direction of the field lines produced by the electric current through the straight wire at point P. Show the direction by an arrow.
n Does the direction of magnetic field lines get reversed if the direction of current through the straight copper wire is reversed? Check it.
Figure 12.6 Figure 12.6 Figure 12.6 Figure 12.6 Figure 12.6 (a) A pattern of concentric circles indicating the field lines of a magnetic field around a straight conducting wire. The arrows in the circles show the direction of the field lines.
(b) A close up of the pattern obtained.
Variable resistance
Reprint 2026-27
Science 200
Imagine that you are holding a current-carrying straight conductor in your right hand such that the thumb points towards the direction of current. Then your fingers will wrap around the conductor in the direction of the field lines of the magnetic field, as shown in Fig. 12.7. This is known as the right-hand thumb rule*.
Example 12.1
A current through a horizontal power line flows in east to west direction. What is the direction of magnetic field at a point directly below it and at a point directly above it?
Solution
The current is in the east-west direction. Applying the right-hand thumb rule, we get that the magnetic field (at any point below or above the wire) turns clockwise in a plane perpendicular to the wire, when viewed from the east end, and anti-clockwise, when viewed from the west end.
Figure 12.7 Figure 12.7 Figure 12.7 Figure 12.7 Figure 12.7
Right-hand thumb rule
* This rule is also called Maxwell’s corkscrew rule. If we consider ourselves driving a corkscrew in the direction of the current, then the direction of the rotation of corkscrew is the direction of the magnetic field.
12.2.3 Magnetic Field due to a Current through a
Circular Loop
We have so far observed the pattern of the magnetic field lines produced around a current-carrying straight wire. Suppose this straight wire is bent in the form of a circular loop and a current is passed through it. How would the magnetic field lines look like? We know that the magnetic field produced by a current-carrying straight wire depends inversely on the distance from it. Similarly at every point of a current-carrying circular loop, the concentric circles representing the magnetic field around it would become larger and larger as we move away from the wire (Fig. 12.8). By the time we reach at the centre of the circular loop, the arcs of these big circles would appear as straight lines. Every point on the wire carrying current would give rise to the magnetic field appearing as straight lines at the center of the loop. By applying the right hand rule, it is easy to check that every section of the wire contributes to the magnetic field lines in the same direction within the loop.
Figure 12.8 Figure 12.8 Figure 12.8 Figure 12.8 Figure 12.8
Magnetic field lines of the field produced by a current-carrying circular loop
Q U E S T I O N S
1. Draw magnetic field lines around a bar magnet.
2. List the properties of magnetic field lines.
3. Why don’t two magnetic field lines intersect each other?
Reprint 2026-27
Magnetic Effects of Electric Current 201
We know that the magnetic field produced by a current-carrying wire at a given point depends directly on the current passing through it.
Therefore, if there is a circular coil having n turns, the field produced is n times as large as that produced by a single turn. This is because the current in each circular turn has the same direction, and the field due to each turn then just adds up.
Activity 12.6 Activity 12.6 Activity 12.6 Activity 12.6 Activity 12.6 n Take a rectangular cardboard having two holes.
Insert a circular coil having large number of turns through them, normal to the plane of the cardboard.
n Connect the ends of the coil in series with a battery, a key and a rheostat, as shown in Fig. 12.9.
n Sprinkle iron filings uniformly on the cardboard.
n Plug the key.
n Tap the cardboard gently a few times. Note the pattern of the iron filings that emerges on the cardboard.
Figure 12.9 Figure 12.9 Figure 12.9 Figure 12.9 Figure 12.9
Magnetic field produced by a current- carrying circular coil.
12.2.4 Magnetic Field due to a Current in a Solenoid
A coil of many circular turns of insulated copper wire wrapped closely in the shape of a cylinder is called a solenoid. The pattern of the magnetic field lines around a current-carrying solenoid is shown in Fig. 12.10. Compare the pattern of the field with the magnetic field around a bar magnet (Fig. 12.4). Do they look similar? Yes, they are similar. In fact, one end of the solenoid behaves as a magnetic north pole, while the other behaves as the south pole. The field lines inside the solenoid are in the form of parallel straight lines. This indicates that the magnetic field is the same at all points inside the solenoid. That is, the field is uniform inside the solenoid.
A strong magnetic field produced inside a solenoid can be used to magnetise a piece of magnetic material, like soft iron, when placed inside the coil (Fig. 12.11). The magnet so formed is called an electromagnet.
Figure 12.10 Figure 12.10 Figure 12.10 Figure 12.10 Figure 12.10
Field lines of the magnetic field through and around a current carrying solenoid.
Figure 12.11 Figure 12.11 Figure 12.11 Figure 12.11 Figure 12.11
A current-carrying solenoid coil is used to magnetise steel rod inside it – an electromagnet.
Q U E S T I O N S
1. Consider a circular loop of wire lying in the plane of the table. Let the current pass through the loop clockwise. Apply the right-hand rule to find out the direction of the magnetic field inside and outside the loop.
2. The magnetic field in a given region is uniform. Draw a diagram to represent it.
Reprint 2026-27
Science 202
1 2 . 3 1 2 . 3 1 2 . 3 1 2 . 3 1 2 . 3 FORCE ON A CURRENT FORCE ON A CURRENT FORCE ON A CURRENT FORCE ON A CURRENT FORCE ON A CURRENT-----C C C C C ARRYING CONDUCTOR ARRYING CONDUCTOR ARRYING CONDUCTOR ARRYING CONDUCTOR ARRYING CONDUCTOR
IN A MAGNETIC FIELD IN A MAGNETIC FIELD IN A MAGNETIC FIELD IN A MAGNETIC FIELD IN A MAGNETIC FIELD
We have learnt that an electric current flowing through a conductor produces a magnetic field. The field so produced exerts a force on a magnet placed in the vicinity of the conductor. French scientist Andre
Marie Ampere (1775–1836) suggested that the magnet must also exert an equal and opposite force on the current-carrying conductor. The force due to a magnetic field acting on a current-carrying conductor can be demonstrated through the following activity.
3. Choose the correct option.
The magnetic field inside a long straight solenoid-carrying current (a) is zero.
(b) decreases as we move towards its end.
(c) increases as we move towards its end.
(d) is the same at all points.
Activity 12.7 Activity 12.7 Activity 12.7 Activity 12.7 Activity 12.7 n Take a small aluminium rod AB (of about 5 cm). Using two connecting wires suspend it horizontally from a stand, as shown in Fig. 12.12.
n Place a strong horse-shoe magnet in such a way that the rod lies between the two poles with the magnetic field directed upwards. For this put the north pole of the magnet vertically below and south pole vertically above the aluminium rod (Fig. 12.12).
n Connect the aluminium rod in series with a battery, a key and a rheostat.
n Now pass a current through the aluminium rod from end B to end A.
n What do you observe? It is observed that the rod is displaced towards the left. You will notice that the rod gets displaced.
n Reverse the direction of current flowing through the rod and observe the direction of its displacement. It is now towards the right.
Why does the rod get displaced?
Figure 12.12 Figure 12.12 Figure 12.12 Figure 12.12 Figure 12.12
A current-carrying rod, AB, experiences a force perpendicular to its length and the magnetic field. Support for the magnet is not shown here, for simplicity.
The displacement of the rod in the above activity suggests that a force is exerted on the current-carrying aluminium rod when it is placed in a magnetic field. It also suggests that the direction of force is also reversed when the direction of current through the conductor is reversed.
Now change the direction of field to vertically downwards by interchanging the two poles of the magnet. It is once again observed that
Reprint 2026-27
Magnetic Effects of Electric Current 203 the direction of force acting on the current-carrying rod gets reversed. It shows that the direction of the force on the conductor depends upon the direction of current and the direction of the magnetic field. Experiments have shown that the displacement of the rod is largest (or the magnitude of the force is the highest) when the direction of current is at right angles to the direction of the magnetic field. In such a condition we can use a simple rule to find the direction of the force on the conductor.
In Activity 12.7, we considered the direction of the current and that of the magnetic field perpendicular to each other and found that the force is perpendicular to both of them.
The three directions can be illustrated through a simple rule, called Fleming’s left-hand rule.
According to this rule, stretch the thumb, forefinger and middle finger of your left hand such that they are mutually perpendicular (Fig. 12.13). If the first finger points in the direction of magnetic field and the second finger in the direction of current, then the thumb will point in the direction of motion or the force acting on the conductor.
Devices that use current-carrying conductors and magnetic fields include electric motor, electric generator, loudspeakers, microphones and measuring instruments.
Example 12.2
An electron enters a magnetic field at right angles to it, as shown in Fig. 12.14. The direction of force acting on the electron will be (a) to the right.
(b) to the left.
(c) out of the page.
(d) into the page.
Solution
Answer is option (d). The direction of force is perpendicular to the direction of magnetic field and current as given by Fleming’s left hand rule. Recall that the direction of current is taken opposite to the direction of motion of electrons. The force is therefore directed into the page.
Figure 12.13 Figure 12.13 Figure 12.13 Figure 12.13 Figure 12.13
Fleming’s left-hand rule
Figure 12.14 Figure 12.14 Figure 12.14 Figure 12.14 Figure 12.14
Q U E S T I O N S
1. Which of the following property of a proton can change while it moves freely in a magnetic field? (There may be more than one correct answer.)
(a) mass (b) speed (c) velocity (d) momentum
Reprint 2026-27
Science 204
12.4 DOMESTIC ELECTRIC CIRCUITS 12.4 DOMESTIC ELECTRIC CIRCUITS 12.4 DOMESTIC ELECTRIC CIRCUITS 12.4 DOMESTIC ELECTRIC CIRCUITS 12.4 DOMESTIC ELECTRIC CIRCUITS
In our homes, we receive supply of electric power through a main supply (also called mains), either supported through overhead electric poles or by underground cables. One of the wires in this supply, usually with red insulation cover, is called live wire (or positive). Another wire, with black insulation, is called neutral wire (or negative). In our country, the potential difference between the two is 220 V.
At the meter-board in the house, these wires pass into an electricity meter through a main fuse. Through the main switch they are connected to the line wires in the house. These wires supply electricity to separate circuits within the house. Often, two separate circuits are used, one of
15 A current rating for appliances with higher power ratings such as geysers, air coolers, etc. The other circuit is of 5 A current rating for bulbs, fans, etc. The earth wire, which has insulation of green colour, is usually connected to a metal plate deep in the earth near the house.
This is used as a safety measure, especially for those appliances that have a metallic body, for example, electric press, toaster, table fan, refrigerator, etc. The metallic body is connected to the earth wire, which provides a low-resistance conducting path for the current. Thus, it ensures that any leakage of current to the metallic body of the appliance keeps its potential to that of the earth, and the user may not get a severe electric shock.
2. In Activity 12.7, how do we think the displacement of rod AB will be affected if (i) current in rod AB is increased; (ii) a stronger horse-shoe magnet is used; and (iii) length of the rod AB is increased?
3. A positively-charged particle (alpha-particle) projected towards west is deflected towards north by a magnetic field. The direction of magnetic field is (a) towards south (b) towards east (c) downward (d) upward
Magnetism in medicine
An electric current always produces a magnetic field. Even weak ion currents that travel along the nerve cells in our body produce magnetic fields. When we touch something, our nerves carry an electric impulse to the muscles we need to use. This impulse produces a temporary magnetic field. These fields are very weak and are about one-billionth of the earth’s magnetic field. Two main organs in the human body where the magnetic field produced is significant, are the heart and the brain. The magnetic field inside the body forms the basis of obtaining the images of different body parts. This is done using a technique called Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). Analysis of these images helps in medical diagnosis. Magnetism has, thus, got important uses in medicine.
More to Know!
Reprint 2026-27
Magnetic Effects of Electric Current 205
Figure 12.15 Figure 12.15 Figure 12.15 Figure 12.15 Figure 12.15 A schematic diagram of one of the common domestic circuits
Q U E S T I O N S
Figure 12.15 gives a schematic diagram of one of the common domestic circuits. In each separate circuit, different appliances can be connected across the live and neutral wires. Each appliance has a separate switch to ‘ON’/‘OFF’ the flow of current through it. In order that each appliance has equal potential difference, they are connected parallel to each other.
Electric fuse is an important component of all domestic circuits. We have already studied the principle and working of a fuse in the previous chapter (see Section 11.7). A fuse in a circuit prevents damage to the appliances and the circuit due to overloading. Overloading can occur when the live wire and the neutral wire come into direct contact. (This occurs when the insulation of wires is damaged or there is a fault in the appliance.) In such a situation, the current in the circuit abruptly increases. This is called short-circuiting. The use of an electric fuse prevents the electric circuit and the appliance from a possible damage by stopping the flow of unduly high electric current. The Joule heating that takes place in the fuse melts it to break the electric circuit.
Overloading can also occur due to an accidental hike in the supply voltage. Sometimes overloading is caused by connecting too many appliances to a single socket.
1. Name two safety measures commonly used in electric circuits and appliances.
2. An electric oven of 2 kW power rating is operated in a domestic electric circuit (220 V) that has a current rating of 5 A. What result do you expect? Explain.
3. What precaution should be taken to avoid the overloading of domestic electric circuits?
Reprint 2026-27
Science 206
What you have learnt n A compass needle is a small magnet. Its one end, which points towards north, is called a north pole, and the other end, which points towards south, is called a south pole.
n A magnetic field exists in the region surrounding a magnet, in which the force of the magnet can be detected.
n Field lines are used to represent a magnetic field. A field line is the path along which a hypothetical free north pole would tend to move. The dir
