Science 212
Activity 13.3 Activity 13.3 Activity 13.3 Activity 13.3 Activity 13.3 and animals. This is one of the ways in which they enter the food chain.
As these chemicals are not degradable, these get accumulated progressively at each trophic level. As human beings occupy the top level in any food chain, the maximum concentration of these chemicals get accumulated in our bodies. This phenomenon is known as biological magnification. This is the reason why our food grains such as wheat and rice, vegetables and fruits, and even meat, contain varying amounts of pesticide residues. They cannot always be removed by washing or other means.
Q U E S T I O N S
1. What are trophic levels? Give an example of a food chain and state the different trophic levels in it.
2. What is the role of decomposers in the ecosystem?
1 3 . 2 1 3 . 2 1 3 . 2 1 3 . 2 1 3 . 2 HOW DO OUR ACTIVITIES AFFECT THE HOW DO OUR ACTIVITIES AFFECT THE HOW DO OUR ACTIVITIES AFFECT THE HOW DO OUR ACTIVITIES AFFECT THE HOW DO OUR ACTIVITIES AFFECT THE
ENVIRONMENT? ENVIRONMENT? ENVIRONMENT? ENVIRONMENT? ENVIRONMENT?
We are an integral part of the environment. Changes in the environment affect us and our activities change the environment around us. We have already seen in Class IX how our activities pollute the environment. In this chapter, we shall be looking at two of the environmental problems in detail, that is, depletion of the ozone layer and waste disposal.
13.2.1 Ozone Layer and How it is Getting Depleted
Ozone (O3) is a molecule formed by three atoms of oxygen. While O2, which we normally refer to as oxygen, is essential for all aerobic forms of life. Ozone, is a deadly poison. However, at the higher levels of the atmosphere, ozone performs an essential function. It shields the surface of the earth from ultraviolet (UV) radiation from the Sun. This radiation n Newspaper reports about pesticide levels in ready-made food items are often seen these days and some states have banned these products. Debate in groups the need for such bans.
n What do you think would be the source of pesticides in these food items? Could pesticides get into our bodies from this source through other food products too?
n Discuss what methods could be applied to reduce our intake of pesticides.
Reprint 2026-27
Our Environment 213
Activity 13.5 Activity 13.5 Activity 13.5 Activity 13.5 Activity 13.5
Activity 13.4 Activity 13.4 Activity 13.4 Activity 13.4 Activity 13.4 is highly damaging to organisms, for example, it is known to cause skin cancer in human beings.
Ozone at the higher levels of the atmosphere is a product of UV radiation acting on oxygen (O2) molecule. The higher energy UV radiations split apart some moleculer oxygen (O2) into free oxygen (O)
atoms. These atoms then combine with the molecular oxygen to form ozone as shown—
O O + O 2
O O O 2 3
The amount of ozone in the atmosphere began to drop sharply in the 1980s. This decrease has been linked to synthetic chemicals like chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) which are used as refrigerants and in fire extinguishers. In 1987, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) succeeded in forging an agreement to freeze CFC production at
1986 levels. It is now mandatory for all the manufacturing companies to make CFC-free refrigerators throughout the world.
n Collect waste material from your homes. This could include all the waste generated during a day, like kitchen waste (spoilt food, vegetable peels, used tea leaves, milk packets and empty cartons), waste paper, empty medicine bottles/strips/bubble packs, old and torn clothes and broken footwear.
n Bury this material in a pit in the school garden or if there is no space available, you can collect the material in an old bucket/ flower pot and cover with at least 15 cm of soil.
n Keep this material moist and observe at 15-day intervals.
n What are the materials that remain unchanged over long periods of time?
n What are the materials which change their form and structure over time?
n Of these materials that are changed, which ones change the fastest?
n Find out from the library, internet or newspaper reports, which chemicals are responsible for the depletion of the ozone layer.
n Find out if the regulations put in place to control the emission of these chemicals have succeeded in reducing the damage to the ozone layer. Has the size of the hole in the ozone layer changed in recent years?
13.2.2 Managing the Garbage we Produce
In our daily activities, we generate a lot of material that are thrown away. What are some of these waste materials? What happens after we throw them away? Let us perform an activity to find answers to these questions.
Reprint 2026-27
Science 214
We have seen in the chapter on ‘Life Processes’ that the food we eat is digested by various enzymes in our body. Have you ever wondered why the same enzyme does not break-down everything we eat? Enzymes are specific in their action, specific enzymes are needed for the break-down of a particular substance. That is why we will not get any energy if we try to eat coal! Because of this, many human-made materials like plastics will not be broken down by the action of bacteria or other saprophytes.
These materials will be acted upon by physical processes like heat and pressure, but under the ambient conditions found in our environment, these persist for a long time.
Substances that are broken down by biological processes are said to be biodegradable. How many of the substances you buried were biodegradable? Substances that are not broken down in this manner are said to be non-biodegradable. These substances may be inert and simply persist in the environment for a long time or may harm the various members of the eco-system.
Activity 13.6 Activity 13.6 Activity 13.6 Activity 13.6 Activity 13.6 n Use the library or internet to find out more about biodegradable and non-biodegradable substances.
n How long are various non-biodegradable substances expected to last in our environment?
n These days, new types of plastics which are said to be biodegradable are available. Find out more about such materials and whether they do or do not harm the environment.
1. Why are some substances biodegradable and some non-biodegradable?
2. Give any two ways in which biodegradable substances would affect the environment.
3. Give any two ways in which non-biodegradable substances would affect the environment.
Q U E S T I O N S
Visit any town or city, and we are sure to find heaps of garbage all over the place. Visit any place of tourist interest and we are sure to find the place littered with empty food wrappers. In the earlier classes we have talked about this problem of dealing with the garbage that we generate. Let us now look at the problem a bit more deeply.
Reprint 2026-27
Our Environment 215
Activity 13.7 Activity 13.7 Activity 13.7 Activity 13.7 Activity 13.7 n Find out what happens to the waste generated at home. Is there a system in place to collect this waste?
n Find out how the local body (panchayat, municipal corporation, resident welfare association) deals with the waste. Are there mechanisms in place to treat the biodegradable and non- biodegradable wastes separately?
n Calculate how much waste is generated at home in a day.
n How much of this waste is biodegradable?
n Calculate how much waste is generated in the classroom in a day.
n How much of this waste is biodegradable?
n Suggest ways of dealing with this waste.
Improvements in our life-style have resulted in greater amounts of waste material generation. Changes in attitude also have a role to play, with more and more things we use becoming disposable. Changes in packaging have resulted in much of our waste becoming non- biodegradable. What do you think will be the impact of these on our environment?
Activity 13.8 Activity 13.8 Activity 13.8 Activity 13.8 Activity 13.8 n Find out how the sewage in your locality is treated. Are there mechanisms in place to ensure that local water bodies are not polluted by untreated sewage.
n Find out how the local industries in your locality treat their wastes.
Are there mechanisms in place to ensure that the soil and water are not polluted by this waste?
Disposable cups in trains
If you ask your parents, they will probably remember a time when tea in trains was served in plastic glasses which had to be returned to the vendor. The introduction of disposable cups was hailed as a step forward for reasons of hygiene. No one at that time perhaps thought about the impact caused by the disposal of millions of these cups on a daily basis. Some time back, kulhads, that is, disposable cups made of clay, were suggested as an alternative. But a little thought showed that making these kulhads on a large scale would result in the loss of the fertile top-soil. Now disposable paper-cups are being used. What do you think are the advantages of disposable paper-cups over disposable plastic cups?
Think it over
Reprint 2026-27
Science 216
Activity 13.9 Activity 13.9 Activity 13.9 Activity 13.9 Activity 13.9 n Search the internet or library to find out what hazardous materials have to be dealt with while disposing of electronic items. How would these materials affect the environment?
n Find out how plastics are recycled. Does the recycling process have any impact on the environment?
Q U E S T I O N S
1. What is ozone and how does it affect any ecosystem?
2. How can you help in reducing the problem of waste disposal? Give any two methods.
What you have learnt n The various components of an ecosystem are interdependent.
n The producers make the energy from sunlight available to the rest of the ecosystem.
n There is a loss of energy as we go from one trophic level to the next, this limits the number of trophic levels in a food-chain.
n Human activities have an impact on the environment.
n The use of chemicals like CFCs has endangered the ozone layer. Since the ozone layer protects against the ultraviolet radiation from the Sun, this could damage the environment.
n The waste we generate may be biodegradable or non-biodegradable.
n The disposal of the waste we generate is causing serious environmental problems.
E X E R C I S E S
1. Which of the following groups contain only biodegradable items?
(a) Grass, flowers and leather (b) Grass, wood and plastic (c) Fruit-peels, cake and lime-juice (d) Cake, wood and grass
2. Which of the following constitute a food-chain?
(a) Grass, wheat and mango (b) Grass, goat and human
Reprint 2026-27
Our Environment 217 (c) Goat, cow and elephant (d) Grass, fish and goat
3. Which of the following are environment-friendly practices?
(a) Carrying cloth-bags to put purchases in while shopping (b) Switching off unnecessary lights and fans (c) Walking to school instead of getting your mother to drop you on her scooter (d) All of the above
4. What will happen if we kill all the organisms in one trophic level?
5. Will the impact of removing all the organisms in a trophic level be different for different trophic levels? Can the organisms of any trophic level be removed without causing any damage to the ecosystem?
6. What is biological magnification? Will the levels of this magnification be different at different levels of the ecosystem?
7. What are the problems caused by the non-biodegradable wastes that we generate?
8. If all the waste we generate is biodegradable, will this have no impact on the environment?
9. Why is damage to the ozone layer a cause for concern? What steps are being taken to limit this damage?
Reprint 2026-27
A n s w e r s
Chapter 1
1. (i) 2. (d) 3. (a)
Chapter 2
1. (d) 2. (b) 3. (d) 4. (c)
Chapter 3
1. (d) 2. (c) 3. (a) 4. (c)
Chapter 4
1. (b) 2. (c) 3. (b)
Chapter 5
1. (c) 2. (a) 3. (d) 4. (b)
Chapter 6
1. (d) 2. (b) 3. (d)
Chapter 7
1. (b) 2. (c) 3. (d)
Chapter 8
Chapter 9
1. (d) 2. (d) 3. (b)
4. (a) 5. (d) 6. (c)
7. Distance less than 15 cm; virtual; Enlarged.
10. 16.7 cm from the lens on the other side; 3.3 cm, reduced; real, inverted.
11. 30 cm
12. 6.0 cm, behind the mirror; virtual, erect
13. m = 1 indicates that image formed by a plane mirror is of the same size as the object.
Further, the positive sign of m indicates that the image is virtual and erect.
14. 8.6 cm, behind the mirror; virtual, erect; 2.2 cm, reduced.
15. 54 cm on the object side; 14 cm, magnified; real, inverted.
16. –0.50 m; concave lens
17. + 0.67 m; converging lens
Reprint 2026-27
Answers 219
Chapter 10
1. (b) 2. (d) 3. (c) 4. (c)
5. (i) –0.18 m; (ii) +0.67 m
6. Concave lens; –1.25 D
7. Convex lens; +3.0 D
Chapter 11
1. (d) 2. (b) 3. (d) 4. (c)
5. Parallel 6. 122.7 m; ¼ times
7. 3.33 Ω 8. 4.8 kΩ 9. 0.67 A
10. 4 resistors 12. 110 bulbs
13. 9.2 A, 4.6 A, 18.3 A
14. (i) 8 W; (ii) 8 W
15. 0.73 A
16. 250 W TV set in 1 hour
17. 1100 W
18. (b) High resistivity of alloys (d) inversely.
Chapter 12
1. (d) 2. (c)
3. (a) True (b) False
6. vertically downwards
7. (i) Right-hand thumb rule, (ii) Fleming’s left-hand rule
Chapter 13
1. (a), (c), (d) 2. (b) 3. (d)
Reprint 2026-27
Science 220
Reprint 2026-27
