Tapestry of the Past
The Gupta Era: An Age of Tireless Creativity
Bhavisha: My head is spinning. There are so many kingdoms and empires. How am I ever going to remember all of this?
Dhruv: Do not worry, Bhavisha! Let us understand what is happening, and we’ll remember it.
Bhavisha: Is there anything in this period that we can see back
Dhruv: Let us use our time machine and find out!
Bhavisha activates ‘Itihāsa’, and they jump to Mehrauli (in Delhi), where the famous Iron Pillar of Delhi stands.
They overhear a tour guide nearby, who was explaining the significance of this pillar.
Fig. 7.3. Iron Pillar, Mehrauli, Delhi
Tour Guide: This Iron Pillar of Delhi is over 1,600 years old and still stands tall without rusting. It is a testament to the advanced metallurgical skills of ancient India.
Bhavisha: 1,600 years old and not rusting! Let us go and see it.
Bhavisha: Look! Is this the famous ‘iron pillar’?
Dhruv: Oh wow! There is something written on it, but I cannot read it.
Bhavisha: I wonder who made this? And why? Let’s hear what the guide uncle has to say about this.
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1
Tour Guide: The 6-tonne pillar was erected during the reign of
Chandragupta II, a ruler of the Gupta dynasty. It was probably erected first in front of the Udayagiri caves (Madhya Pradesh) and brought to Delhi a few centuries later. It was dedicated to Viṣhṇu, and its inscriptions celebrate the king’s achievements.
Both: That is so fascinating! We would love to learn more about this king and his empire.
Let us begin this exciting journey into the history of the Gupta
DON’T MISS OUT
Picture leaving a bicycle out in the rain for just one year — it would soon show signs of rust. Yet this ancient pillar, standing under the open sky for centuries, remains unaltered. Scientists have tried to uncover its secret, and they believe it is because a unique thin layer, created by the special iron used and oxygen from the air, forms on the surface of the iron, protecting it from corrosion.
A New Power Emerges
By the 3rd century CE, the Kuṣhāṇa Empire, which spread over the north and northwest of the Subcontinent, started to weaken.
New kingdoms emerged, setting the stage for a fresh period of consolidation, and the new actor on this stage was the Gupta dynasty.
There are various theories on the origin of the Guptas. However, it is widely believed that they emerged in a region near present- day Uttar Pradesh as regional rulers. Over time, they rose to prominence and established a powerful empire. The Gupta period is considered remarkable in Indian history and is marked by significant developments in many areas. The fields of art, architecture, literature and science flourished, particularly during the time of Chandragupta II, and that legacy continues even today.
Reprint 2026-27
Tapestry of the Past
The Gupta Era: An Age of Tireless Creativity
Fig. 7.4. Gold coin featuring King Chandragupta I with his queen,
Kumāradevī; on the reverse side, a seated goddess identified as Lakṣhmī
The warrior king
The prayāga praśhasti, a pillar inscription in Prayagraj, praises the achievements of Samudragupta, Chandragupta II’s father.
According to the author of the inscription — the court poet
Harisena — the king’s ambition was to be ‘dharaṇi-bandha’ or to
‘unify the Earth’. To this end, he fought many wars, defeating
The inscription on the iron pillar in Delhi speaks of a king named
‘Chandra’, who has been identified with Chandragupta II (not to be confused with Chandragupta Maurya from the Maurya dynasty, whom we met earlier). Chandragupta II, also known as ‘Vikramā ditya’, was one of the renowned rulers of the Gupta dynasty. He was a devotee of Viṣ hṇ u and his mount (vāhana)
Garuḍa often appears on many inscriptions.
DON’T MISS OUT
Have you noticed the ‘II’ in Chandragupta II’s name?
Historians added this number because there was another
‘Chandragupta’ before him — his grandfather! (This tradition of naming the first son after his grandfather is followed by some Indian families even today.) Chandragupta I, as he is referred to, played a crucial role in the early expansion of the
Gupta Empire; he is remembered for his coins and strategic alliances, which helped him consolidate his power and lay the foundation for a strong empire.
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 kings, taking over their kingdoms and expanding his empire.
Many defeated kings were reinstated and offered tribute to Samudragupta, while others, fearing his might, submitted without protest.
Harisena also wrote about how the king supported art, learning and trade, making his kingdom rich and successful. Samudragupta himself is portrayed as a veena player in one of the coins he minted (Fig. 7.6).
Fig. 7.6. A seated Samudragupta, playing the veena; on the reverse side, goddess Lakṣhmī
Fig. 7.5. An inscription by Harisena
LET’S REMEMBER
Ambitious kings sometimes performed the aśhvamedha yajn͂a to build mighty empires and leave a legacy for the future.
Such a significant event was commemorated by minting special coins like the one shown in Fig 7.7.
THINK ABOUT IT
Why do you think kings chose to proclaim their achievements in the form of inscriptions?
Reprint 2026-27
Tapestry of the Past
The Gupta Era: An Age of Tireless Creativity
Some literary sources give us descriptive information about rulers, kingdoms and the people. The Viṣhṇu Purāṇa, for instance, specifies the key regions of the empire: “The Gupta dynasty will rule over Anugaṅga (the middle-Gangetic basin),
Prayā ga (present-day Prayagraj), Sā keta (Ayodhya), and Magadha (approximately Bihar) and all the surrounding regions.” But at its peak, the Gupta Empire covered a larger area than this — most of present-day north and west India, along with parts of central and east India.
LET’S EXPLORE
In the Grade 6 chapter ‘Timeline and Sources of History’, we listed multiple sources that help us understand the past.
Compile a list of the sources we have referred to so far in the chapter. What did we learn from each source?
Imagine what it would have entailed to move a whole army of soldiers, elephants, horses, cooks, and other support staff, as well as the supplies to feed them all. Clearly, the tributary kings must have been asked to provide for these.
LET’S EXPLORE
Take a political map of India and locate the present-day states and Union territories where the Guptas ruled (see
Fig. 7.8). Mark these states on the map and count how many you found. Then, compare your findings with your friends to see if everyone got the same number or discovered something different!
Fig. 7.7. This coin depicts the sacrificial horse of the aśhvamedha yajña; the reverse depicts the queen holding a chauri (fly whisk).
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1
Fig. 7.8. The Gupta Empire’s extent. Note that the Vā kā ṭakas were the allies of the
Guptas. The Guptas claim to have conquered parts of the east coast, down to the
Pallavas, whom they may have briefly subdued.
Ujjayinī
Indraprastha
Pāṭaliputra
DESERT Sāketa
Tāmralipti
Vaiśhālī
KĀMARŪPA KĀMARŪPA
VĀKĀṬAKA VĀKĀṬAKA
Kānchīpura
PALLAVA PALLAVA
Ghaghara
Godavari
Brahmaputra
G R E A T H I M A L A Y A N R A N G E
PLATEAU OF TIBET
Reprint 2026-27
Tapestry of the Past
The Gupta Era: An Age of Tireless Creativity
A Traveller’s Account of Indian Society in the Gupta Age
Chinese traveller Faxian (pronounced as Fa-Shi-Anne) visited
India in the early 5th century CE. He set out on this long and difficult pilgrimage to visit sacred Buddhist sites, learn from renowned Indian scholars and collect manuscripts of Buddhist texts so he could take them back to China. Faxian travelled extensively across India, observing her culture, governance and society, and recorded his experiences and observations for the people of his homeland — and for us too — since his travelogue has survived to this day!
Below is an excerpt from his travelogue, where he records his observations of the society in the Gupta era.
The people are numerous and happy […] they have no need to register households or attend to officials. […] Those who farm royal land pay a portion of their grain. […] The king’s guards and attendants have salaries […] The cities are the greatest in the
Middle Kingdom [i.e. the Gangetic plains], and the inhabitants are rich, prosperous, and practice kindness and righteousness.
Heads of Vaishya families [i.e. merchants or traders] establish houses for charity and medicines […] the poor, orphans and the sick are cared for […] doctors provide treatment, and the needy receive food and medicines. […] The city has many wealthy
Vaishya elders and foreign merchants, with beautiful homes
[…] The lanes are kept in good order.
– A Record of Buddhistic
Kingdoms (AD 399–414) (Translated by J. Legge)
LET’S EXPLORE
Read the excerpt from Faxian given above and identify the key features of the society he describes. Write down your observations and compare your notes with your friends — you might be surprised to see how differently others interpret the same text!
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1
Excerpts from historical accounts like Faxian’s are valuable sources, but they reflect only the writer’s perspective and focus at one point in time and for a limited portion of the society they describe. Let us not, however, forget that elsewhere in his travelogue, Faxian also describes the harsh treatment of the chanḍālas, who were regarded as outcastes and lived outside the city limits.
Just as you may have perceived the excerpt from Faxian’s travelogue differently from your friends, a group of historians may examine the same source and draw varied interpretations from it. Historians then look at more sources to corroborate their understanding. This reminds us of the need to assess multiple sources, perspectives and interpretations before drawing conclusions.
Glimpses of the Gupta Empire
Governance and administration
Let us observe the map in Fig. 7.8. You will notice that many kingdoms coexisted during the same period. Some of them may have been at war with each other in their ambition to expand their control. Recall what we saw earlier about Kauṭilya’s ideas on ruling a kingdom. He advised rulers to form alliances (mitra)
as one of the components of the saptānga.
New kings … new titles
Inscriptions and coins provide valuable insights into the titles adopted by Gupta rulers, such as ‘mahārājadhirāja’,
‘samrā ṭ’, and ‘chakravartin’. These titles reflected their claim to supreme authority and emphasised their superiority over earlier rulers who used simpler titles like ‘rājan’ and
‘mahārāja’.
The Gupta rulers used various strategies, including military conquests, diplomacy, and alliances, to expand and consolidate their vast empire. The last method included matrimonial alliances. A well-known example is that of Prabhā vatī Gupta,
Outcastes:
rejected from a social or cultural group; in this case, a category of people considered socially too low to be part of the varṇa
Reprint 2026-27
Tapestry of the Past
The Gupta Era: An Age of Tireless Creativity
Fig. 7.9. The Kevala Narasimha temple dedicated to Narasimha, one of the avatars of
Viṣhṇu; according to some historians, this temple was constructed by Prabhāvat ī Gupta’s daughter in her memory daughter of Chandragupta II, who was married to a prince of the Vā kā ṭaka kingdom — the Guptas’ neighbours to the south.
Tragically, the Vā kā ṭaka prince died early, making her the regent ruler of the kingdom. During her reign, she ensured that the ties between the Vā kā ṭakas and the Guptas remained strong.
One of her inscriptions describes her as a ‘mother of two kings’, referring to her two sons who ascended the Vā kā ṭaka throne. As a devotee of Viṣ hṇ u like her father, Prabhā vatī is also associated with the construction of seven temples dedicated to this god and his avatars. Some of these temples are in Ramagiri (Ramtek hill)
in present-day Maharashtra.
Ruler: A temporarily governs a unable to do so until they can.
LET’S EXPLORE
Observe the painting of
Prabhā vatī Gupta sitting in her court (Fig. 7.10). Take note of the details — her attire, posture, the people around her, and the setting of the court. What do these elements tell you about her life, role, and the time she lived in? Discuss your observations in groups and share your insights with the class. Fig. 7.10. An artist’s reimagination of
Prabhā vatī Gupta sitting in her court
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1
The Gupta Empire had a well-organised system of administration.
Instead of controlling everything from a central authority, they divided the empire into provinces and granted land to local rulers, priests and chieftains. These land grants were carefully inscribed on copper plates to keep accurate records — many of which have been discovered by archaeologists in recent times.
This system helped ensure proper tax collection and allowed the
Gupta rulers to govern efficiently while still giving local leaders some control over their regions.
Thriving trade
The primary source of revenue of the Gupta’s was land tax.
Other sources included fines, taxes on mines, irrigation, trade and crafts. This revenue was used for administration, maintaining the army, building temples and infrastructure, and supporting scholars and artists.
As we see once again, for such an empire to sustain itself, it had to promote a vibrant internal and external trade. In the Gupta era, India traded with the Mediterranean world, Southeast Asia and China, exporting textiles, spices, ivory and gemstones. The
Indian Ocean trade network connected Indian ports to distant markets. One significant stop on the way to the Mediterranean markets was Socotra Island, strategically located in the Arabian
Sea. Archaeological evidence, such as pottery, inscriptions in the Brahmi script, and designs such as a Buddhist stūpa, has established the presence of Indian traders there over several centuries, apart from traders from Egypt, Arabia, Rome and
Greece. This small island carries evidence of the rich cultural exchanges that trade promoted in the Indian Ocean.
New Ideas and Wonders: The Classical Age
As we saw, Gupta rulers were devout followers of Viṣ hṇ u; this is often reflected in their coins and inscriptions. However, they also supported other traditions and schools of thought.
They patronised Buddhist institutions, including the renowned
Nā landā university and several other Buddhist vihāras (monastery). Their approach was inclusive and open. We will explore these institutions further in higher grades.
Reprint 2026-27
Tapestry of the Past
The Gupta Era: An Age of Tireless Creativity
Indeed, the prolonged period of peace and stability during the
Gupta period promoted notable achievements in various fields, leading some historians to label this period the ‘classical age’ of India. It was also the time when knowledge from previous eras was consolidated and compiled into numerous texts.
Sanskrit literature flourished, with Kā lidā sa’s works and many major Purāṇ as. Ā ryabha ṭa and Varā hamihira recorded major advancements in mathematics and astronomy, while medical texts compiled and refined medical theories and practices. Metallurgy also progressed, as we saw with the rust-resistant Iron Pillar.
This stability strengthened the economy, allowing the state to support scholars, artists, and scientists, leading to cultural and intellectual growth.
Chandragupta II kept himself surrounded by many learned men, poets and artists, and his patronage of such diverse talent enriched his court greatly.
Let us take a look at some of the remarkable figures of this period. Fig. 7.12. Chandragupta II goes to war (an artist’s imagination from the 1920s)
Fig. 7.11. Remains of Nalanda University
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1
Āryabhaṭa: He lived in Kusumapura (near present-day Patna), a famous centre of learning, around 500 CE and authored a short treatise of mathematics and astronomy called Āryabhaṭīya. He gave formulas to calculate the motions of the Sun, the Moon and the planets, and proposed that the Earth spins on its axis, which explains the alternation of day and night. He gave the length of a year as 365 days, 6 hours, 12 minutes, and 30 seconds, just a few minutes off from the modern value (365 days, 5 hours,
48 minutes, and 45 seconds). Ā ryabha ṭa also provided a fair estimate of the size of the Earth and a correct explanation for solar and lunar eclipses. His work became the foundation for further scientific advances in India and beyond. In mathematics, ryabha ṭa described a number of techniques of calculation and equation-solving, some of which you learn at school without knowing that they were first formulated 1500 years ago!
Varāhamihira: He was a mathematician, astronomer and astrologer from the same period. He lived in Ujjayinī, a city famous for its tradition of learning and scholarship.
His encyclopedic work,
Bṛihat Samhitā, covered a wide range of subjects from astronomy and astrology to weather forecasting, architecture, town planning and even farming. His ability to observe the world, apply logical reasoning, and combine it with traditional knowledge made him a pioneer in science. Fig. 7.13
Reprint 2026-27
Tapestry of the Past
The Gupta Era: An Age of Tireless Creativity
LET’S EXPLORE
Let’s join Bhavisha and Dhruv with their time machine in the time of the Guptas. You are getting an opportunity to meet ryabhaṭa and Varā hamihira—what would you ask them?
Divide the class into two groups and create a series of questions for an interview with them.
Fig. 7.14. The yakṣha’s message to the clouds – a scene from Meghadūtam.
Kālidāsa: Little is known about Kālidāsa’s life; legends suggest that he was once ridiculed by others, which motivated him to work hard and transform his life. He is renowned f
