India and the World: Land and the People
1 – Natural Resources and Their Use
Natural Resources and Their Use
Concerned social scientists are clear on what we need to do: we must move toward a regenerative economy, an economy that operates in harmony with nature, repurposing used resources, minimizing waste, and replenishing depleted resources.
We must return to the innate wisdom of nature herself, the ultimate regenerator and recycler of all resources.
― Christiana Figueres and
Tom Rivett-Carnac in ‘The Future We Choose’
1. How do we categorise natural resources?
2. What is the connection between the distribution of natural resources and different aspects of life?
3. What are the implications of unsustainable use / over exploitation of natural resources?
Questions
Fig. 1.1. Dudhsagar waterfall and the railway bridge, Goa, India
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1
When does Nature become a Resource?
One of the meanings of the word ‘Nature’ is the totality of life and non-life forms that are part of our environment but have not been created by humans. When humans use these for their sustenance, or create new things from them for consumption, these elements of Nature become ‘resources’. For example, trees are part of the environment; they exist independently of humans.
When we cut them and convert their wood into furniture, we see the trees as a resource.
Often these entities are not easily accessible. For example, there may be petroleum in places deep under the ocean that we do not have the technology to access, or the extraction cost may be too high; or it may be culturally unacceptable like cutting trees in sacred groves. So, for an entity to be called a resource, it should be technologically accessible, and its exploitation should be economically feasible and culturally acceptable. (Usually, the word ‘exploitation’ has a negative connotation; in the context we use it here, it means ‘extraction, utilisation and consumption of Natural resources’.)
The Earth has treasures, many of which have formed over millions of years, and which humans have taken and learnt to use. These include the most obvious ones like water, air and soil, and also the not-so-obvious ones like coal, petroleum, precious stones, metal ores, timber, etc.
Fig. 1.2. A microhydel plant in
Himachal Pradesh—the power of flowing water converted into electricity
Fig. 1.3. An offshore oil rig extracts petroleum from below the seabed
Reprint 2026-27
India and the World: Land and the People
1 – Natural Resources and Their Use
DON’T MISS OUT
Æ In many indigenous traditions of the world, Nature is considered sacred. You have read about this. In such traditions,
Nature is a nurturer and nourisher.
Æ Do you know of practices that reflect this?
THINK ABOUT IT
Take a pause. Look at yourself and the things around you. What is the origin of each of them? At some point they all lead to
Nature; even the plastic button on your shirt.
In short, we apply the term ‘natural resources’ to materials and substances that occur in Nature and are valuable to humans.
Categories of Natural Resources
In Science, we learn the usefulness of categorisation and naming
— we use some shared characteristics (or criteria) when we categorise ideas or things; we name the categories so that we can refer to them with just one word or a short phrase. When these names and meanings are shared across groups of people, it helps
Fig. 1.6. Tulasī puja for wellbeing
Fig. 1.5. Honey from a beehive Fig. 1.4. Gentle ploughing causes minimal disturbance to the underground ecosystem and retains soil moisture.
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 us discuss a set of ideas or things without needing to describe them every time. We can communicate more effectively, too. In earlier classes, you learnt about living and non-living things. As soon as we use these words, you know what they mean. This is a simple example of categories.
We do the same with natural resources.
THINK ABOUT IT
What might be the different criteria we can use to categorise natural resources?
One of the ways we could categorise natural resources is based on the uses we put them to — essential for our life, source for materials and sources for energy.
Resources essential for life
Life could not exist on Earth without the air we breathe, the water we drink and the food we eat. We take these from the atmosphere, the rivers and ponds, and through the cultivation of soil or other living things. We cannot make the air we breathe, the water we drink, or the soil which gives us food.
Resources for materials
Human beings create physical objects out of Nature’s gifts. We make them for our utility or to create things of beauty that enrich our lives and those of others ― a piece of wood can be transformed into a chair and also carved into a statuette. India’s geographical diversity provides us with a wide variety of natural resources, from wood to marble, and coal to gold.
Resources for energy
Energy is a cornerstone of modern living — electricity for our buildings, transportation, and all types of production processes.
This energy can come from diverse natural sources: coal, water, petroleum, natural gas, sunlight, wind, etc.
Reprint 2026-27
India and the World: Land and the People
1 – Natural Resources and Their Use
Renewable and non-renewable resources
A second way of categorising natural resources could be based on whether they are renewable or not.
A general principle of Nature is that it functions in a restorative and regenerative way. Restoration is the process of returning something to its original healthy state if it has been degraded or damaged. Nature heals, renews and maintains herself over time. A cut on your skin will normally heal; a forest recovers after a wildfire. Regeneration goes beyond restoration. It is about Nature’s ability to create new life and the conditions for thriving.
We plant trees in areas that may have lost them on account of human interventions like clearing forests for housing. Planting the types of trees that were originally growing there restores the ecosystem
— the trees provide food and shelter for birds, squirrels and other creatures, enabling life to return.
Nature works in cycles where there is no waste. Take a forest. Let’s say a tree falls in the forest. It decomposes with the bacteria, fungi and insects feeding on it. The tree becomes part of the soil enriching it. New trees and plants grow from seeds … eventually some will fall and the cycle starts again.
These are examples of Nature’s principle of restoration and regeneration in practice.
Renewable resources
Renewable resources exhibit these characteristics over time. Most of India has abundant sunshine. In the natural course, rivers are
Fig. 1.7. River water, a renewable resource as long as glaciers and forests exist
Fig. 1.8. We can take timber from the forest, in limited quantities, for a long time if we allow it to regenerate.
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 fed regularly by rain and melting glaciers, forests renew themselves, soil replenishes itself through natural processes, and so on.
Solar energy, wind energy, energy from flowing water, timber from forests are renewable resources as long as we are able to manage them in a sustainable manner.
However, for them to remain renewable there is a condition — the natural rhythm of restoration and regeneration must not be disturbed. If we harvest timber faster than the forest can grow trees, we will eventually deplete the forest. Scientists have shown that through irresponsible human actions, many of Nature’s cycles have been disturbed. A combination of several factors interacting — fossil fuel-driven industrialisation and the cutting down of forests for agriculture and other purposes are two of them — has led to rising temperatures that we are experiencing; on account of this, the glaciers in some places in the Himalayas are melting at a rate faster than precipitation can replace them. This has implications on water security for the populations living in the plains dependent on the ‘water tower’.
DON’T MISS OUT
Æ Traditionally, communities had a system of regulating (or refraining from) fishing during the spawning season to enable the maintenance of the fish population.
However, the commercialisation of fishing resulted in over-fishing. In the case of a type of fish called tuna, for example, the rapid and extensive decline in their population led to some agreements on control of fishing.
Nevertheless, this important type of fish that keeps the ocean ecosystem in balance by consuming smaller fish, shrimps, etc., is on a decline.
Æ Do you know of other traditional practices that help the ecosystem to stay in balance?
Fig. 1.9. Offering arghyam to Sūrya, the sun-god, in gratitude.
Arghyam:
offering, generally of water, as a mark of respect or gratitude
Reprint 2026-27
India and the World: Land and the People
1 – Natural Resources and Their Use
We need industries to produce the goods we consume. The process also creates wastes that are frequently discharged into rivers and other water bodies. Often, these wastes cannot decay to become the food of some lifeform.
Instead, it leads to a disturbance in Nature’s cycle of restoration and regeneration, leading to a situation where the river becomes poisonous and cannot support life.
LET’S EXPLORE
Identify human actions in your surroundings that result in
Nature losing her ability to restore and regenerate. What types of interventions can be undertaken to restore Nature’s
DON’T MISS OUT
Æ Ecosystem functions and ecosystem services: Nature has some inherent ways of working. For example, trees naturally produce oxygen. When these natural processes benefit humans, we call them ‘ecosystem services’. We can think of it like this: a forest naturally filters water, prevents soil erosion, and provides habitat for animals
— these are ecosystem functions. When we benefit from clean water, protected farmland, and pollinated crops because of that forest, we are receiving ecosystem services from Nature.
Æ A mature tree produces about 275 litres of oxygen per day (this varies a little depending on the type of tree). A human being needs about 350 litres of oxygen every day (this can change based on the type of activity that an individual engages in, their height and weight, and so on).
Fig. 1.10. Waste from industries is often disposed without proper treatment
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1
LET’S EXPLORE
Take up a small research study to assess the types of renewable resources in your region; you may discuss with your teacher the geographical area of your study and sources to access information that you may need. What has been the change in their status over time? Make a small report that identifies the reasons for the change and what may be done.
Non-renewable resources
Non-renewable resources are created over long periods. They cannot be replenished at the rate we use them. For example, fossil fuels (coal and petroleum), and minerals and metals like iron, copper and gold, are non-renewable resources. India has significant quantities of coal reserves. We mine coal to meet our growing need for energy, but it has been estimated that the coal reserves in India may last another 50 years; the demand for electricity has been increasing as the population expands and development work accelerates. Till more sustainable options become available widely, we need to use the coal we have judiciously.
LET’S EXPLORE
What are the non-renewable resources that you use daily, directly or indirectly? What are the possible renewable substitutes? What are some of the steps we can take to transition to renewables?
Distribution of Natural Resources and its Implications
Natural resources are not evenly distributed across our planet or even within countries. This uneven distribution shapes human settlements, trade patterns, international relations, and conflicts too. Many wars have been fought, and continue to be fought, to gain control over natural resources.
Reprint 2026-27
India and the World: Land and the People
1 – Natural Resources and Their Use
LET’S EXPLORE
Observe the map in Fig.1.11. Notice the uneven distribution of important minerals. What types of resources are available in your region? How are they distributed?
Industries located near natural resources create employment opportunities for the local people. Townships grow around them and expand economic opportunities for others, too. More modern facilities that improve the quality of life become accessible.
However, these benefits are often accompanied by costs, in the short term as well as in the long term. We have examples from across the world of people living in resource-rich areas who have been displaced from their homes to facilitate such
Fig. 1.11. Distribution of important minerals
Hugrijan
Naharkatia
Ankleshwar
Mumbai High
Ratnagiri
Kudremukh
Chitradurga
Amarkantak
Bilaspur
Bailadila
Singhareni
Chandrapur
Iron Ore
Talcher Keonjhar
Bokaro Raniganj
Mayurbhanj Gua
Chikkamagaluru
70º E 75º E 80º E 85º E 90º E
0 200 400 Km
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 developments. In some cases their sacred places are under threat, leading to conflicts.
National and international trade depend on the geographical location of natural resources.
Combined with human knowledge and skills, these can create unique products like the
Wootz steel. As we know, trade fuelled the development of large empires in India.
LET’S EXPLORE
Æ Select any two natural resources. Gather information about their availability across different parts of India.
Mark them on a map. What do you observe about their distribution? What are the types of economic activities connected with them?
Æ Discuss the implications of extracting the natural resources in those parts for current and future gene- rations. Suggest ways in which we can use Nature’s gifts in responsible ways.
Nature does not pay attention to political boundaries. This leads to tensions regarding the sharing of natural resources across states as well as countries. One example is the sharing of
Kaveri River water among Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and
Puducherry; negotiations and deft management were required to maintain peace and fair sharing. Of course, reaching such agreements between neighbouring countries is not easy.
LET’S EXPLORE
Find out about such a conflict in the international context.
Discuss your findings in the class.
Fig. 1.12. Shared waters of the
Brahmaputra river
Yarlung Tsangpe
Brahmaputra
Reprint 2026-27
India and the World: Land and the People
1 – Natural Resources and Their Use
The ‘Natural Resource Curse’
Having abundant natural resources does not guarantee economic prosperity. Some regions rich in natural resources can experience slower economic growth and development — a phenomenon economists call the ‘natural resource curse’ or the ‘paradox of plenty’. Put very simply, this means that often having plenty of natural resources does not automatically mean that a country is rich. Frequently, economies are unable to develop industries that convert the resources into products of higher value; the chapter ‘Factors of Production’ in the latter part of this book will give you an understanding of this.
India has generally avoided this curse by investing in the development of such industries to meet our growing needs.
LET’S EXPLORE
What do you think are the different inputs required to enable the use of the natural resources available in different geographical areas?
However, the challenge of balancing resource extraction with sustainability remains. Understanding and managing natural resources is a valuable starting point, but human knowledge, good governance, and strategic planning determine whether they become lasting benefits or temporary windfalls.
Fig. 1.13. Mettur dam in Tamil Nadu built on the Kaveri river
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1
Responsible and Wise Use of Natural
Resources: Stewardship
Sustaining life on Earth requires that we respect Nature and use natural resources in a way that enables the restoration and regeneration of renewable resources, and the responsible and judicious use of non-renewable ones.
Scientists studying these aspects have warned that the irresponsible treatment of natural resources has led to pollution, biodiversity loss and climate change, which has been taking place at an increased pace in recent years.
Restoration and regeneration of renewable resources
Here are two examples of how we are pushing the use of natural resources beyond their capacity to regenerate.
Many farmers in our country extract groundwater for irrigation purposes. In most states, the extraction rate is greater than the rate at which the water table is replenished. Over time, this deficit builds up, leading to higher cost of extraction of groundwater and eventually to its unavailability. It has been predicted that many of our growing cities will run out of groundwater soon. Initiatives to raise groundwater levels have been launched to remedy this.
Traditional practices of water harvesting, rejuvenation of ponds and tanks, cutting down on wasteful consumption of water, processing and reusing water are some of the strategies attempted.
Similarly, the improper use of chemical fertilisers and pesticides has led to soil degradation. Tradi- tional farming practices considered soil to be part of Mother Earth.
Practices like the use of cow dung and other natural fertilisers, mulching, multi-cropping, and so on, enabled holistic soil management. We must learn from these practices and apply
Biodiversity
The decline variety of life on Earth
Fig. 1.14. Crop failure on account of injudicious use of chemical fertilisers
Reprint 2026-27
India and the World: Land and the People
1 – Natural Resources and Their Use them in our current situation
