Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1
A NOTE ON HISTORY’S DARKER PERIODS
History sometimes seems to be full of wars and destruction; it is true that it rarely focuses on periods when the society is, on the whole, harmonious and peaceful. But while every country may have had such peaceful eras and some benevolent rulers, history seems peopled by incompetent, corrupt or cruel rulers. We find them especially in what we may call the darker chapters or periods of history, when war, abuse, fanaticism, bloodshed, etc., suddenly dominate the landscape and inflict suffering and misery on the whole society or country.
The world over, historians have faced this dilemma: how much attention should we draw to such darker periods? Should we omit them entirely?
Should we mention them in passing, with most atrocious details left out?
Or should we face them and analyse them so as to understand what made such developments possible and, hopefully, help avoid their recurrence in future? The third option is, in our opinion, the best, if it can be done with enough detachment and sensitivity; it is important to know our past, pleasant or unpleasant, since the past continues to live with us and shapes the present.
What do we mean by ‘detachment and sensitivity’? Simply that it is important to study those darker developments dispassionately, without blaming anyone living today for them. For instance, you will learn later that World War II (1939–1945) resulted in millions of deaths worldwide;
Germany then followed a cruel ideology (known as ‘Nazism’) which believed in the extermination of ‘inferior races’ and resulted in the inhuman treatment of some ethnic groups and a brutal rule of occupied nations. Yet it would be clearly unacceptable to blame today’s Germans for what happened over eight decades ago. Rather, what matters is to understand what made the Nazi ideology possible, so that similar ideologies today or tomorrow may be defeated.
The same principle applies to the ‘Tapestry of the Past’ chapters in this textbook, which include passages on warfare and instances of cruelty or brutality. While those happenings cannot be erased or denied, it would be wrong to hold anyone today responsible for them. Understanding the historical origin of cruel violence, abusive misrule or misplaced ambitions of power is the best way to heal the past and build a future where, hopefully, they will have no place.
Reprint 2026-27
