Tapestry of the Past
2 – Reshaping India’s Political Map
Reshaping India’s
Political Map 2
1. How did foreign invasions and the rise of new dynasties reshape
India’s political boundaries during this period?
2. How did Indian society respond to invasions? How did India’s economy adapt during times of political instability?
3. What impact did this period have on the lives of the people?
Questions
Fig. 2.1. An aerial view of the Qutub Minar complex, Delhi
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1
Fig. 2.2.
The period in this chapter and the next is often called the latter part of the ‘medieval period’ of Indian history. The term ‘medieval’ (i.e.,
‘between two ages’) was originally applied to European history, roughly from the fall of the Roman Empire (5 th century CE) to the
Renaissance (Europe’s cultural revival in the 14 th –16 th centuries, nurtured by the rediscovery of Greek and Roman art and literature).
It was once thought to mark a dark age before the development of modern science; but, of course, Europe’s and India’s histories are very different, so applying the same term ‘medieval’ to both is not ideal, and historians do not always agree on which period it covers in India.
We will sometimes have to use the term ‘medieval’ but for us it simply means the period from the 11 th to the 17 th centuries.
In ‘Tapestry of the Past’ chapters, we have tried to keep as few dates as possible — only those that mark important reference points. You will find it helpful to keep revisiting the timelines in those chapters.
Revisit the maps too, as they will help you visualise the geography that was traversed by armies, common people, traders, scholars or spiritual figures.
1200 1240 1280 1320 1360 1400 1440 1480
1206: Establishment of the Delhi Sultanate
1326: Re-establishment of the Mewar Kingdom
1336: Establishment of the Vijayanagara Empire
1398: Timur attacks Delhi
1498: Arrival of the
Portuguese in India
Establishment of the
Bahmani Sultanate
Reprint 2026-27
Tapestry of the Past
2 – Reshaping India’s Political Map
A new era in India’s journey began in the early 11 th century.
Invasions from beyond the Hindu Kush mountains reshaped
India’s political map. No doubt, India had seen much warfare in earlier periods, but the spate of invasions by people from outside the Indian subcontinent during this period was unprecedented.
Many of these invaders were Central Asian — Turkic or Afghan.
They were drawn to India not only for her reputed riches and for territorial ambitions, but also often to spread, by force of violence if necessary, their own versions of their religion.
Let us now explore in this chapter the ever-changing landscape of India from the 13 th century onward.
1520 1560 1600 1640 1680 1720 1760 1800
1556: Second Battle of Panipat; Akbar’s decisive victory
1576: Battle of
Haldighati; Maharana
Pratap forced to retreat 1699: Formation of the Khalsa by Guru
Gobind Singh
1799: Establishment of the Sikh Empire
1754: Beginning of Maratha control of Delhi 1671: Battle of
Saraighat; the Ahoms defeat the Mughals
1565: Battle of
Talikota, destruction of Vijayanagara city
1526: First Battle of Panipat; Babur’s victory establishes the
Mughal Empire
Spellings, spellings …
Because of difficulties in transcribing the Persian script in the Roman script, you will find some alternative spellings in parentheses here and there. For instance, ‘Khalji’ or ‘Khilji’ are the same. Similarly, we use here the now standard spelling of ‘Mughal’ spelling, but alternatives such as ‘Mughul’ or
‘Moghul’ are still sometimes used.
Refers to peoples, languages, and cultures historically associated with a vast stretching
Central Asia, all the way to
Turkey and
Siberia.
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1
Fig. 2.3. A comparison of the territories under the Tughlaqs and the Lodis (13 th to 15th centuries), and regional powers in the south and east.
Daulatabad
Junagadh
Jajnagar
Gwalior Jaunpur
Peshawar
Halebidu
Eastern Ganga Territory under Narasimhadeva (1264)
Hoysala Territories (1300)
Extent of Tughlaq Dynasty (1335)
Extent of Lodi Dynasty (1479)
Important cities
0 250 500km
Reprint 2026-27
Tapestry of the Past
2 – Reshaping India’s Political Map
Rise and Fall of the Delhi Sultanate
We begin our journey here with the Delhi Sultanate, formed after the defeat in 1192 of King Prithviraj Chauhan, who ruled over parts of northwestern India. This Sultanate saw the rule of five successive foreign dynasties of Turkic-Afghan origin — the Mamluks (or ‘Slave dynasty’), the Khiljis (or Khaljis), the
Tughlaqs, the Sayyids, and the Lodis (or Lodhis). While certain parts of northern India came under the control of the Delhi
Sultanate, neighbouring kingdoms, such as the Eastern Gangas in the east and the Hoysalas in the south resisted its advance (Fig. 2.3) and also emerged as thriving centres of art, culture, and administration. The city of Delhi also assumed a bigger role in the political landscape of northern India.
The Sultanate period was marked by political instability combined with efforts at territorial expansion. This resulted in military campaigns that raided villages and cities, and plundered
Sultanate:
A territory ruled by a ‘Sultan’
— a title that some adopted.
Fig. 2.4. The Qutub Minar. Fig. 2.5. A section of the Quwwat-ul-Islam (‘Might of Islam’) mosque in Delhi’s Qutub Minar complex; its construction began in Qutub-ud-din Aibak’s time (early
13 th century) and was completed by later sultans. An inscription states that materials from 27 destroyed Hindu and Jain temples were used in the construction, some of which can be seen here.
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 and destroyed temples and seats of learning. Successions (the appointments of new sultans) were often violent:
almost two sultans out of three seized power by eliminating their pre- decessor, so that a sultan’s average reign was hardly more than nine years!
Fig. 2.6. A coin minted by Ala-ud-din Khilji, which bears the inscription ‘Sikander Sani’ or ‘the second Alexander’ in Persian.
LET’S EXPLORE
Looking at Fig. 2.6, why do you think Ala-ud-din Khilji called himself ‘the second Alexander’?
At the turn of the 14 th century, Ala-ud-din Khilji conducted military campaigns over large areas of north and central India, sacking and plundering many cities; at the same time, he also repelled several invasions by Mongol forces, who were trying to add India to the vast Mongol Empire (it covered most of Asia at the time).
His slave-general Malik Kafur expanded the Sultanate’s reach southward, conquering several kingdoms on the way; their plundered wealth helped finance the Sultanate’s enormous military apparatus. He also attacked a number of Hindu centres such as Srirangam, Madurai, Chidambaram, and possibly
Rameswaram.
LET US EXPLORE
What kind of resources do you think were needed to maintain an army and wage war in those days? Discuss in groups the various types of expenditure involved, from weapons or food for soldiers to animals used in warfare, road construction, etc.
A few decades later, Muhammad bin Tughlaq (or ‘Tughluq’)
ruled Delhi and expanded the Delhi Sultanate’s territories further. For the first time since the Mauryan Empire, most of
Reprint 2026-27
Tapestry of the Past
2 – Reshaping India’s Political Map the Subcontinent was now under one ruler. Although this dominance was significant, it proved to be short-lived. Muhammad bin Tughlaq had ambitious schemes, but they were often poorly executed. One such was moving his capital from Delhi to Daulatabad (then called ‘Devagiri’, near present-day Sambhaji
Nagar); perhaps he thought its more central location would offer better control of the empire. The people were forced to travel over
1,000 km, and a few years later, as his plan misfired, he shifted the capital back to Delhi; both transfers resulted in great loss of life according to some sources. Another instance was the introduction of
‘token currency’, where cheap copper coins were declared to be tokens and have the value of silver or gold coins
— although this was a progressive idea (most of our currency today is actually ‘token’), at the time this created confusion in the trade and encouraged people to counterfeit copper coins, all of which caused the economy to decline.
The sultans and their court elite lived in luxurious palaces, enjoying elaborate clothing, jewelled ornaments and fine food.
This wealth was largely derived from plunder from their military campaigns, taxes levied on common people and conquered regions, and engagement in slave trade (as enslaved people
Fig. 2.7. A 19th
-century painting depicting
Muhammad bin Tughlaq in his court
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1
Iconoclasm:
The rejection or destruction of icons or religious images considered idolatrous.
provided free labour or were sent away to distant Central Asia to be sold). But plunder, in turn, affected trade networks and agricultural production. This period also witnessed numerous attacks on sacred or revered images in Buddhist, Jain and Hindu temples; such destruction was motivated not just by plunder but also by iconoclasm.
THINK ABOUT IT
Why do we use the term ‘image’ rather than common terms like ‘idol’ or ‘icon’? The latter two terms are considered pejorative in the context of Judaism, Christianity and Islam, whose orthodox sects condemn ‘idolatry’ or the worship of
‘idols’ or ‘icons’.
India’s classical texts used words like mūrti, vigraha, pratimā, rūpa, etc., to designate images, often statues, used for worship in temples or homes. In English, ‘image’ is a neutral term.
Some of the sultans also imposed the jizya, a tax on non-
Muslim subjects to grant them protection and exemption from military service. In practice, depending on the ruler, this discriminatory tax would be a source of economic burden and public humiliation, and formed a financial and social incentive for subjects to convert to Islam. At the end of the 14 th century,
Timur, a brutal Turkic-Mongol conqueror from central Asia, invaded northwest India and launched a devastating attack on Delhi, then a thriving city. As he wrote in his memoirs, his two-fold objective was to wage “war with the infidels and to gain something by plundering the wealth of the infidels.”
Large numbers were killed or enslaved, and the city was left in ruins. Timur soon withdrew from India with huge plunder, leaving chaos behind. In the aftermath, the Lodis emerged and established the last dynasty of the Delhi Sultanate. By then, however, its territory had shrunk considerably in the face of increasing resistance from other states and kingdoms from within India (see Fig. 2.3).
Infidel:
Literally, who does not share the faith (of a given religion). For medieval
Christianity, infidels were
Muslims or
Pagans; for medieval infidels were
Christians or, in the of India,
Buddhists or
Reprint 2026-27
Tapestry of the Past
2 – Reshaping India’s Political Map
Resistance to the Delhi Sultanate
Throughout its rule, the Delhi
Sultanate faced resistance from many quarters. While many kingdoms fell into its net, it failed to subdue the
Eastern Ganga kingdom (see
Fig. 2.3) of Kalinga, which included present-day Odisha and parts of Bengal and
Andhra Pradesh. One of its rulers in the mid-13 th century,
Narasimhadeva I (also spelt
Narasingha Deva I), was noted for the military strength and cultural brilliance he brought to the kingdom. Apart from repelling multiple inroads of the Sultanate, he defeated the
Delhi Sultanate’s governor of
Bengal. Partly to commemorate these victories, he built the famed Sūrya temple at Konark (present-day Odisha).
THINK ABOUT IT
During the time of the Tughlaqs, the Musunuri Nayakas,
Telugu chieftains, rallied over 75 more chieftains of the region, formed a confederacy that defeated smaller provinces, formed a confederacy that defeated the Delhi Sultanate forces, and expelled Muhammad bin Tughlaq’s army from Warangal (present-day Telangana) around 1330-1336. Do you think it would have been an easy task to bring together 75 leaders in those days?
Fig. 2.8. A statue depicting Narasimhadeva I seated on his throne, surrounded by attendants and musicians.
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1
We mentioned earlier Ala- ud-din’s push to the South, attracted by its renowned wealth. At the time, the
Hoysalas ruled parts of southern India (mostly present-day Karnataka, see Fig. 2.3) and fended off several attacks from the
Delhi Sultanate, remaining the only independent kingdom in the south.
However, weakened by these attacks and internal conflicts, the Hoysala kingdom declined and, in the mid-14 th century, was absorbed into the
Vijayanagara Empire further south (see below).
DON’T MISS OUT
The sculpture in Fig. 2.9 narrates the story behind the
Hoysalas’ emblem. Kannada folklore recounts the story of
Sala, a young man who fought a lion to save his guru, giving the dynasty its name — ‘Hoy (strike)! Sala’.
The Delhi Sultanate also faced rebellions from the emergence of several independent regional Sultanates. The Bahmani
Sultanate, for instance, rose in the mid-14 th century and controlled much of the Deccan for a while. Powerful Sultanates also emerged in Gujarat, Bengal and other regions, leading to a complex interplay of alliances — and frequent wars. Parts of Rajasthan also remained beyond the reach of the Delhi
Sultanate; in the 15 th century, it faced stiff resistance from Rana
Kumbha, the ruler of the Mewar kingdom, who also successfully repelled invasions from these later sultanates.
used for
Fig. 2.9 The Hoysalas built magnificent temples, for instance those of Belur (this picture) and Halebidu.
Reprint 2026-27
Tapestry of the Past
2 – Reshaping India’s Political Map
DON’T MISS OUT
Kumbhalgarh Fort (Fig. 2.10) was built by Rana Kumbha in the
15th century in the Aravalli hills and served as a stronghold for the rulers of Mewar, a prominent Rajput kingdom (in the central and southern parts of today’s Rajasthan). Surrounded by forests and steep slopes, it is famous for its massive 36-kilometre-long wall, one of the longest continuous walls in the world.
LET’S EXPLORE
Why do you think such locations were chosen for many of the medieval forts? Discuss pros and cons. (Hint: think of issues of strategy, security, vulnerability, etc.)
The Vijayanagara Empire
While the Delhi Sultanate grew politically more unstable, a new centre of power emerged in the south. In the 14 th century, two brothers, Harihara and Bukka, who had initially served as governors under Muhammad bin Tughlaq, eventually rejected
Delhi’s authority, and established an independent kingdom that became a significant force in southern India and grew into the
Vijayanagara Empire.
Fig. 2.10. A view of the Kumbhalgarh Fort in the Aravalli hills
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1
DON’T MISS OUT
According to popular folklore, Harihara and Bukka witnessed a remarkable sight at Hampi (in present-day Karnataka) — a hare turning around and chasing a pack of hounds, symbolising unexpected strength and courage. When they recounted this incident to their guru, Vidyaranya, he interpreted it as a symbol of resilience and bravery, and advised them to establish their capital at that very spot.
To the north of the Vijayanagara Empire (see Fig. 2.12), the Bahmani
Sultanate was a major rival; it eventually fragmented into five independent states called the ‘Deccan Sultanates’ — Bijapur,
Golconda, Berar, Ahmednagar, and Bidar — each ruled by former governors or tarafdars who declared autonomy. The Vijayanagara rulers battled with the first two, as well as with the Gajapati rulers of Odisha in the east.
THINK ABOUT IT
Have you noticed the term pati in titles like ‘Gajapati’? Pati means ‘lord’ or ‘master’ and was commonly used by many ruling dynasties of this period to signify power and stature. The
Vijayanagara kings were called ‘Narapati’, the Bahmani Sultanate rulers ‘Ashwapati’, and the Maratha rulers ‘Chhatrapati’ — each title reflecting different aspects of kingship and power. Can you guess what these three terms might mean?
Fig. 2.11. A section of the ruins of Vijayanagara city (present-day Hampi).
The large building is the Virūpākṣha temple.
Reprint 2026-27
Tapestry of the Past
2 – Reshaping India’s Political Map
Fig. 2.12. Kingdoms in the Deccan and the Vijayanagara Empire
Ahmednagar
Jajnagar (Vijayapura)
(Achalpur)
Vijayanagara (Kozhikode)
Golconda
Gajapati Kingdom (1458)
Important cities
Bahmani Sultanate (1477)
Vijayanagara Empire (1509)
Vijayanagara Empire under
Krishnadevaraya (1529)
150 300km
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1
Fig. 2.13. The mahāmandapa (great hall) of the Vitthala temple; note the grandeur and intricacy of the architecture, in particular the finely sculpted monolithic pillars; when struck, their smaller columns give out different musical notes — hence their name ‘musical pillars’!
Krishnadevaraya
In the 16 th century, the Vijayanagara Empire reached its peak under its celebrated ruler, Krishnadevaraya, who expanded and secured the empire’s dominance over the Deccan. Under his rule, the empire achieved both military power and cultural renaissance. He patronised poets and scholars in Sanskrit,
Telugu and Kannada; he himself composed an epic poem in
Telugu, Āmuktamālyada, on the story of the Tamil poet-saint
Āṇḍāl; one section of the work is a Rājanīti (‘royal policy’) where he expounded his ideas of good governance. Krishnadevaraya provided grants to many temples, including Tirupati in Andhra
Pradesh and the Vitthala temple in his own capital Vijayanagara, which displayed many grand temples, palaces and other buildings.
Reprint 2026-27
Tapestry of the Past
2 – Reshaping India’s Political Map
DON’T MISS OUT
Foreign travellers visited Vijayanagara for trade. Portuguese travellers, in particular, were very well treated,
