Tapestry of the Past
3 – The Rise of the Marathas
The Rise of the Marathas 3
Among the merchants, the hat-wearers like the Portuguese, the
English, the Dutch, the French and the Danes also conduct trade.
But they are not like other merchants…. They are fully intent on entering this land, increasing their territory and propagating their religion. They are obstinate people, and Navy and gunpowder are their chief weapons. Their traffic should be controlled, and they shouldn’t be allowed to build strong buildings.
— Ramachandrapant Amatya, Ādnyāpatra (1715)
1. Who were the Marathas? How did they manage to become the largest pan-Indian power before the British took over?
2. What were some features of their governance?
3. What impact did the Maratha
Empire leave in Indian history?
Questions
Fig. 3.1. Raigad Fort, Maharashtra, with the grand entrance to the palace where
Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj was crowned in 1674, marking the formal beginning of the Maratha Empire.
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1
Who are the Marathas?
The Marathas are a group of people native to the Deccan plateau, more specifically present-day Maharashtra.
They are identified with the language they speak —
Marathi — which has had a rich and continuous literary history since the 12th century. In this chapter, we will see them rise as a powerful political entity that will alter the course of India’s history.
During the 13th century, most of Maharashtra was ruled by the Yadava dynasty with Devagiri (present-day Daulatabad)
as its capital. In the early Fig. 3.3. Sant Ramdas
Literary history:
The historical development of writings in prose or poetry in a particular language.
1630 1720 1690 1660 1680
1630: Birth of
Chhatrapati Shivaji
1657: Founding of the Maratha
1680: Death of
Chhatrapati Shivaji
1674: Chhatrapati
Shivaji’s coronation at Raigad
1646: Beginning of
Chhatrapati Shivaji’s rule
Imprisonment at, and escape from,
1682–1707:
Mughal-Maratha
Fig. 3.2.
Dakṣhiṇa digvijaya (conquest of the South)
Fig. 3.4. Postal stamp showing Sant Tukaram
Reprint 2026-27
Tapestry of the Past
3 – The Rise of the Marathas
14th century, the Yadava dynasty was overcome by the Khilji
Sultanate from Delhi.
Amidst such political changes, the cultural traditions continued, particularly those related to bhakti (devotion to the divine or a particular deity). Between the 7th and the 17th centuries, for spiritual upliftment, saints and seekers from several parts of
India preferred the path of bhakti to merely external ritualism.
These saints, coming from diverse sections of society, composed devotional songs and poetry in the languages of the masses, which allowed their messages to travel far and wide.
LET’S EXPLORE
Have you ever heard the term ‘bhakti’? What does it mean to you? Choose a bhakti saint from any part of India and learn about their life, their teachings, and the message they shared. You can also find one of their poems or bhajans and share it with your classmates.
1750 1840 1810 1780
1761: Battle of Panipat (Maratha
1818: Third Anglo-
Maratha war; end of
Maratha power
1775–1782:
First Anglo-
Maratha War;
Maratha victory
1754: Beginning of Maratha control over
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1
In Maharashtra, many saints like Dnyaneshwar, Namdev,
Tukaram, Ramdas, etc., gained popularity at this time. They helped translate important texts like the Upaniṣhads and the
Bhagavad Gītā into Marathi, making their philosophy accessible to the people. Some also focused on social organisation and political awareness, similar to the Sikh gurus. As a result, the society acquired a solid cultural foundation, which later helped the Marathas to organise themselves into a political power.
By the 17th century, some Maratha chiefs made early attempts at establishing sovereignty, but they proved unsuccessful — until
Chhatrapati Shivaji rose to power and brought the Marathas together. But who was Shivaji?
Foundation of Maratha Power and the
Rise of Chhatrapati Shivaji
In 1630, Shivaji was born in the
Bhonsle clan to Shahji and Jijabai.
At the time, Shahji served the
Deccan sultanates and was often away from his family. Meanwhile, in his jāgīr at Pune, Chhatrapati
Shivaji grew up under the watchful eyes of Jijabai and some trusted officials, receiving values and a good education. At this time, the Pune region was deeply affected by constant infighting between the Deccan sultans whom the Marathas served, which caused much hardship for the common people.
When he was just 16, Chhatrapati Shivaji launched military campaigns, first consolidating his hold over the Pune region by capturing neglected and unoccupied forts and strengthening their defences. His vision of a sovereign kingdom or ‘Swarājya’ grew over the years, extending to political, economic and cultural aspects, which we will explore in this chapter.
Fig. 3.5. A painting of Shivaji made in the 1680s (British Museum)
A jāgīr was a piece of land given by a king or ruler to someone (usually a noble or soldier) as a reward for their service.
The person who got the jāgīr could collect taxes from the land and use the money to take care of their needs or help the king when
Reprint 2026-27
Tapestry of the Past
3 – The Rise of the Marathas
Chhatrapati Shivaji’s kingdom soon expanded to India’s west coast, and to secure access to the resources of coastal regions, he felt the need to establish a navy. This was a truly revolutionary step at the time. By comparison, the Bijapur Sultanate (ruled by the Adil
Shahi dynasty), maintained merchant ships but did not possess a full-time naval force which could protect the coast; even the Mughal
Empire’s use of a navy was very limited. Thus, the Maratha Navy was born, whose exploits became legendary.
To protect his people from powerful enemies, Chhatrapati Shivaji had recourse to the tactic of guerrilla warfare, which uses small groups of people in a focused way, with speed, surprise, and knowledge of the terrain to defeat bigger armies. His successes soon invited the wrath of the Bijapur Sultanate, which sent the veteran general Afzal Khan to confront him. Chhatrapati Shivaji and his advisers managed to convince Afzal Khan to meet him for a one-on-one meeting at the foot of the Pratapgad fort amid thick forests. There, Chhatrapati Shivaji killed Afzal Khan, and the
Marathas, hidden in the mountains, routed the Khan’s army with guerrilla attacks.
THINK ABOUT IT
If you could time-travel and meet Chhatrapati Shivaji, what three questions would you ask him and why?
Fig. 3.6. The Sindhudurg Fort near the Maharashtra-Goa border is one of the several naval fortifications built by the Marathas.
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1
DON’T MISS OUT
The wāgh nakh is a small weapon shaped like a tiger’s claw, which Chhatrapati
Shivaji used to kill Afzal
Khan in close combat. Fig. 3.7. Wāgh nakh or the ‘tiger’s claw’.
LET’S EXPLORE
Try to find out more about guerrilla warfare. Which other countries in the world adopted this method? What geographical advantages did they utilise for this? Discuss your findings in groups.
Soon afterwards, the Mughal nobleman Shaista Khan invaded
Chhatrapati Shivaji’s territories with a big army for three years.
Finally, with only a few soldiers, Chhatrapati Shivaji raided
Shaista Khan’s camp at night. The Khan barely escaped from the raid, losing a few fingers, and promptly left Maharashtra. This daring raid resembles the modern-day surgical strike.
As a retaliatory action for the three-year-long wave of attacks,
Chhatrapati Shivaji sacked Surat, a wealthy port city of the
Mughal Empire (in present-day Gujarat). There, he obtained enormous treasure worth almost one crore of rupees, an extremely large sum for the time. However, he was careful not to attack religious places and even spared the house of Mohandas
Parekh, a charitable man. He sacked Surat again after a few years. These events became so famous that they appeared in the London Gazette, an English newspaper of the time, which conveyed how Chhatrapati Shivaji wrote to all European diplomatic agents in Surat, demanding ‘immediate presents of money’, failing which he would ‘return and ruin that city’.
The sacking of Surat was a great insult to the might and prestige of the Mughal Empire. Therefore, Aurangzeb sent Jai Singh, a distinguished Rajput general, to defeat Chhatrapati Shivaji.
Against him, Chhatrapati Shivaji had to concede defeat at
Purandar Fort (near Pune) and enter into a treaty. He had to give up a sizeable part of his kingdom, and his son Sambhaji had to enter Mughal service.
Surgical
A military intended to damage only a specific target, with no or minimal to other people or infrastructure.
Reprint 2026-27
Tapestry of the Past
3 – The Rise of the Marathas
Chhatrapati Shivaji was persuaded by Jai Singh to visit the
Mughal court at Agra, where he was made to stand before
Aurangzeb, and a Mughal general whom he had defeated earlier.
Incensed at this insult, Chhatrapati Shivaji stormed out of the court, following which Aurangzeb put him under house arrest.
To escape this, Chhatrapati Shivaji devised a strategy — he started distributing gifts to holy men and Mughal generals. The gifts often contained fruits and sweets, packed in big baskets.
The guards initially checked them, but soon stopped doing so;
expecting this, Chhatrapati Shivaji and his son Sambhaji hid themselves in the baskets and made their escape. Aurangzeb could never capture Chhatrapati Shivaji again.
Fig. 3.8. A court scene with Chhatrapati Shivaji on his throne receiving visitors (panel in Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Park, Mumbai)
A few years later, in 1674, Chhatrapati Shivaji was coronated with full Vedic rites at the strong mountain fortress of Raigad.
His formal title after the coronation was ‘Shri Raja Shiva
Chhatrapati’, and like some past rulers, he started his own era, the Rājyābhiṣheka shaka.
After this, Chhatrapati Shivaji embarked upon a conquest of the South, also referred to as the dakṣhiṇa-digvijaya, which included the important and then ill-defended region of present-day northern Tamil Nadu and parts of Karnataka (see map in Fig. 3.9). This southern extension later gave the Marathas great strategic depth against the Mughal invasion.
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1
DON’T MISS OUT
While in the South, Chhatrapati Shivaji forbade the Dutch from trading slaves. At the time, most Europeans were capturing and selling Indians as slaves and encountered no opposition from Indian powers, until Chhatrapati Shivaji intervened. His stance on this abuse showed his deep concern for his subjects.
Fig. 3.9. Chhatrapati
Shivaji’s Kingdom about 1680 (Ekoji’s role is explained later in the chapter).
Kolhapur
To Muscat and Mocha
Pratapgad
Sindhudurg Vengurla
Vijaydurg
Porto Novo
Thanjavur
Puducherry
SEA BAY OF
R. Narmada
72º E 76º E 80º E
R. Godavari
R. Krishna
R. Kaveri
R. Kolleru
R. Palar
0 100 200 km
Territory under
Chhatrapati
Shivaji Maharaj
Territory under
Foreign power
Hill fort
Coastal fort
Land fort
R. Tungabhadra
R. Penneru
To Malacca
R. Godavari
R. Bhima
Reprint 2026-27
Tapestry of the Past
3 – The Rise of the Marathas
A fever claimed Chhatrapati Shivaji’s life when he was fifty.
He was a master strategist and a true visionary, and within his lifetime, his exploits had become legendary across India and beyond. The Europeans compared him with ancient generals like
Alexander, and the Bundela prince Chhatrasal was so inspired by Chhatrapati Shivaji’s struggle against the Mughals that he managed to create an independent kingdom of Bundelkhand (divided between present-day Uttar Pradesh and Madhya
Pradesh). The famous Hindi poet Bhushan specifically came to
Maharashtra to meet Chhatrapati Shivaji and composed poems in his praise, some of which remain famous to this day.
LET’S EXPLORE
Pick an event from Chhatrapati Shivaji’s life and, with your classmates, stage it as a play.
The Marathas after Chhatrapati Shivaji
Chhatrapati Shivaji had two sons — Sambhaji and Rajaram.
After Chhatrapati Shivaji’s death, Sambhaji became the
Chhatrapati. The Marathas were then the only obstacle to total
Mughal control of the Deccan. Aurangzeb invaded the Deccan and conquered the Bijapur (or Adil Shahi) and Golconda (or
Qutb Shahi) Sultanates. He then captured Sambhaji and, after torturing him brutally, executed him. After this, he captured
Raigad, the Maratha capital.
After Sambhaji, Rajaram became the Chhatrapati and fled to Gingee (in present-day Tamil Nadu). The Mughal-Maratha conflict thus spread to south India. The Marathas staunchly defended their fortresses and often had the upper hand over the Mughals in battles and skirmishes. Aurangzeb was thus unable to leave the Deccan and died without having succeeded in subduing the Marathas, who emerged as a strong contender to the Mughals. No longer on the defensive, the Marathas led by
Tarabai, Rajaram’s queen, made large-scale inroads into Mughal territories, eventually conquering large parts of India.
During this rapid expansion, the Marathas themselves underwent a structural transformation. The centralised state
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 from Chhatrapati Shivaji’s time gave way to a more decentralised structure, still nominally centred around the
Chhatrapati, but with the chiefs wielding more power. In particular, the Peshwa (a Persian term for ‘prime minister’)
wielded great influence, even over the Chhatrapati himself. In particular,
Peshwa Bajirao I and his son Nanasaheb
Peshwa were instrumental in the pan-Indian expansion of the Marathas.
The Marathas brought large parts of India under their control and generally ruled them well. But with the regional chiefs acquiring more power and autonomy, this also resulted in occasional indiscipline and abuse, in stark contrast with Chhatrapati Shivaji’s values. For instance, the Marathas’ ten-year campaign in Bengal inflicted much cruelty and devastation on the common people.
In their northward expansion, the Marathas briefly controlled the areas of Lahore, Attock and even Peshawar (in modern-day Pakistan). They fought with the Afghans, and despite suffering a disastrous defeat at Panipat in 1761, they quickly recovered during the time of Peshwa
Madhavrao I. Under the leadership of Mahadji Shinde (also known as Mahadji Scindia), they went on to recapture Delhi in 1771, which remained under their control till the British captured it three decades later.
In the latter half of the 18th century, the chief rivals of the
British in India were the Marathas. Three Anglo-Maratha wars (as they are called) were fought between 1775 and 1818. Owing to the Marathas’ increased internal disunity and the superior organisational and technological abilities of the British, they succeeded in ending the Maratha power. In effect, the British took India from the Marathas more than from the Mughals or any other power.
Fig. 3.10. Chhatrapati Shahu Maharaj (Sambhaji’s son), seated right and sporting a falcon, in counsel with Nanasaheb Peshwa
Reprint 2026-27
Tapestry of the Past
3 – The Rise of the Marathas
DON’T MISS OUT
Did you know that Nana Phadnavis, a powerful official under the Peshwas, is credited with organising the first pan-Indian anti-British alliance? He even united with old adversaries like Hyder Ali of Mysore and the Nizam of Hyderabad in this endeavour.
Fig. 3.11. A mural of a British officer surrendering before Nana
Phadnavis and Mahadji Shinde after the first Anglo-Maratha war.
Maratha Administration
Civilian administration
Chhatrapati Shivaji instituted a relatively centralised administration for his kingdom. He abolished the hereditary posts (generally practised under the Sultans or the Mughals)
and land assignments and paid a salary to every government official out of the state treasury. Many officials were periodically transferred as well, ensuring that they would not have enough power to dictate terms to the king.
Chhatrapati Shivaji also gave pensions to widows of soldiers who died in battles, even offering military posts to their sons, thus demonstrating his care for the soldiers and their families.
Fig. 3.12. Chhatrapati Shivaji minted gold and copper coins in his own name, signifying his sovereignty. The use of the
Devanagari script was also an assertion of his cultural identity.
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1
THINK ABOUT IT
Chhatrapati Shivaji issued strict instructions to his officials not to mistreat the subjects or to forcefully grab even a blade of grass from them. In one of the letters issued to his officials,
Chhatrapati Shivaji says:
“Wood from big trees like teak is required for the Navy. If needed, secure permission for cutting the trees from the forest and then proceed. Other trees like the mango and jackfruit are also useful, but do not touch them. Because such trees take many years to mature, and the people look after them like their children. If you cut them, will their sorrow ever end? If you accomplish something by oppressing others, it perishes soon, along with the oppressor. There is harm in the absence of such trees as well. Therefore, do not use force in any circumstances.”
Based on Chhatrapati Shivaji’s letter, what can you tell about his values as a ruler?
Chhatrapati Shivaji also had an aṣhṭa pradhāna manḍala, or council of eight ministers (Fig. 3.13), to assist him with administration.
Fig. 3.13.
Minister
Intelligence
Minister
Land Revenue
Minister
Chief Justice
Nyāyādhīsh
Religious Affairs
Panḍitrāo
Commander-in-chief
Senāpatī Minister for
Foreign Affairs
Prime Minister
The Sovereign King
Chhatrapatī
Reprint 2026-27
Tapestry of the Past
3 – The Rise of the Marathas
The Marathas often levied taxes called chauth (25 per cent)
and sardeshmukhi (an additional 10 per cent to chauth) from provinces that were not directly under them, including places in the Deccan and north Indi
