Tapestry of the Past
4 – The Colonial Era in India
The Colonial Era in India 4
Nearly two centuries ago the early Britons in Bengal and the sister
Presidencies regarded the land and the people as fair game for plunder. … Under the later Britons, as administrators … the plunder is proceeding far more outrageously today than at any preceding period. … Modern England has been made great by Indian wealth, … wealth always taken by the might and skill of the stronger.
— William Digby (1901)
Fig. 4.1. A painting entitled ‘The East offering its riches to Britannia’, by a Greek painter, Spiridione Roma, 1778.
(The painting is discussed later in the chapter.)
1. What is colonialism?
2. What drew European powers to India?
3. What was India’s economic and geopolitical standing before and during the colonial period?
4. How did the British colonial domination of India impact the country?
Questions
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1
In the previous chapter, we saw the Marathas considerably weaken the Mughal Empire, before they themselves succumbed to the British forces early in the 19 th century. And yet, military campaigns were only one factor in India becoming the ‘jewel in the Crown’ of the British Empire — indeed, the empire’s largest
The Age of Colonialism
Before we get there, we must step back a little in time and consider the phenomenon of colonialism. Its usual definition is the practice where one country takes control of another region, establishing settlements there, and imposing its political, economic, and cultural systems. This is not a recent occurrence:
colonialism can be traced to the time of the great empires in the 1 st millennium BCE; in the 1 st millennium CE, the spread of Christianity and Islam also involved the colonisation of the territories converted to the new faiths.
1440 1490 1540 1590 1640
1498: Vasco da
Gama’s arrival at
Calicut (Kozhikode)
1560: Establishment of the Inquisition
1612-1690: The
English East India
Company establishes trading posts at Surat,
Madras, Bombay and
Calcutta
Fig. 4.2.
Reprint 2026-27
Tapestry of the Past
4 – The Colonial Era in India
But the ‘Age of Colonialism’ usually refers to Europe’s expansion from the 15 th century onward, which, within a few centuries, extended to large parts of the world. As you will discover in higher grades, European powers — in particular, Spain, Portugal,
Britain, France, and Netherlands — established colonies across
Africa, Asia, the Americas, Australia and many Pacific islands, after conquering large parts of those regions of the world.
Often, the conquests were achieved through military campaigns that involved the massacre or enslavement of native populations.
What impelled those nations to undertake such campaigns?
Political competition between European powers created a race for territorial expansion and global influence. Territorial expansion had obvious economic advantages: access to new natural resources, new markets and new trade routes — and, often, plunder, as we will see. Converting indigenous popu- lations to Christianity was another powerful motivation. A lesser one, but significant nonetheless, was scientific inquiry — the
Enslavement:
someone into a slave.
1690 1740 1790 1840 1890
1674: The French East India
Company sets up a trading post at Pondicherry
1757: British victory in the
Battle of Plassey
1741: Defeat of the Dutch at the Battle of Colachel
1746-1763:
The Carnatic
Wars between the British and the French
1770-1772: First great famine in
1848-49: Fall of the Sikh
Empire; the East India
Company annexes Punjab
1818: Third
Anglo-Maratha war ends
Maratha power
1829-1833: The
Khasi Uprising (in present-day
Meghalaya)
1835: Macaulay’s
Minute on
Indian Education
1858: The British
Crown ends the rule of the East India
Company; start of the British Raj
1857: The Great
Indian Rebellion
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 desire to explore unknown lands so as to accumulate knowledge of the planet’s geography and natural history.
While colonisers often claimed they had the ‘civilising mission’ of bringing ‘progress’ to the colonised peoples, who were often demonised as ‘savage’, ‘primitive’ or ‘barbaric’, the reality was very different: loss of independence, exploitation of resources
Demonise:
To falsely portray an individual or a group of people in a very negative
Fig. 4.3. A cartoon depicting a British business magnate straddling
Africa while he holds a telegraph wire (Edward Linley Sambourne in
Punch magazine, London, 1892).
by the colonisers, the destruction of traditional ways of life, and the imposition of foreign cultural values. It is true that the colonial age brought the world together, saw a rapid growth of economies and technologies, but the benefits were mostly for the colonisers; many historical studies have documented the immense hardships that the colonised people had to endure.
Reprint 2026-27
Tapestry of the Past
4 – The Colonial Era in India
LET’S EXPLORE
What do you think the cartoon (Fig. 4.3) is trying to express?
(Keep in mind that the telegraph, which permitted instant communications for the first time, was then a recent invention.) Analyse different elements of the drawing.
In many of the colonised regions, resistance built up against the colonisers. The phenomenon of colonialism declined in the mid-20 th century, especially after World War II; many factors contributed to rapid worldwide decolonisation, with most colonised countries attaining independence. Here, however, we will focus on the special case of India.
Europeans in India
India traded with the Greeks and the Romans over two millennia ago. Indian goods — spices, cotton, ivory, gems, sandalwood, teakwood, wootz steel, among other commodities
— were highly sought after in the Mediterranean world. Until the 16 th century CE, when European powers began sailing to the Indian Subcontinent, India was a vibrant economic and cultural powerhouse. Historical estimates (by economist
Angus Maddison, in particular) suggest that India contributed at least one-fourth of the world GDP during this whole period, making it one of the two largest economies globally alongside
China (whose contribution was of the same order). It is remarkable that from the 16 th century onward, many European travellers to India described her as ‘flourishing’ and noted her manufacturing capabilities, diverse agricultural output, and extensive internal as well as external trading networks. However, this economic prosperity also made India an attractive target for
European colonial ambitions.
Let us survey Europe’s first colonial powers in India.
The Portuguese: commerce and atrocities
The Portuguese explorer and navigator Vasco da Gama’s arrival at Kappad (near Kozhikode in Kerala) in May 1498 paved the way for the beginning of European colonisation in India.
Abbreviation of ‘gross domestic product’, a measure of the value of goods and services a country (or the world, in this case)
produces in one year.
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1
Though he was well received, his aggressive ways failed to establish friendly relations with the local rulers. During his second voyage four years later, he seized, tortured and killed Indian merchants, and bombarded Calicut from the sea. The Portuguese captured strategic ports, including Goa (in 1510), which became the capital of their colony in India, as well as several trading posts along the Malabar and
Coromandel coasts.
The Portuguese implemented a system known as cartaz (pass), requiring all ships in the Arabian Sea to purchase
Portuguese permits for navigation. Ships without these permits were seized.
This naval dominance allowed them to monopolise the spice trade between
India and Europe for nearly a century.
Alongside commercial exploitation, the Portuguese presence in western
India was characterised by religious persecution.
In Goa, they established the Inquisition in 1560, which severely persecuted
Hindus, Muslims, Jews, and Christian converts suspected of practising their original faith. Such
Inquisition:
A tribunal set up by the Roman
Catholic Church to judge heretics (i.e. Christians suspected of holding opinions contrary to the
Church’s doctrine).
Over some 600 years, across
Europe many thousands of supposed heretics were tortured and executed.
Fig. 4.4. A plaque in
Kozhikode marking Vasco da Gama’s arrival in 1498
A few centuries ago, the port town of
Ullal (in present-day southern Karnataka)
was an important trading point control- led by Rani Abbakka I.
In the latter half of the 16 th century, the
Portuguese repeatedly attempted to take it over, but Rani Abbakka I formed strategic alliances with neighbouring kingdoms and thwarted their attempts. She was eventually captured and died fighting in prison. Her successor Rani Abbakka II is reported to have created fireballs out of coconut shells and set several ships of the
Portuguese navy on fire. Their inspirational stories are remembered even today through the Yakṣhagāna, a traditional form of dance-drama.
Reprint 2026-27
Tapestry of the Past
4 – The Colonial Era in India persecution was accompanied by forced conversions and the destruction of many Hindu temples, among other forms of abuse of the native population. (The Goa Inquisition was only abolished in 1812.)
The Dutch: commerce and competition
The Dutch arrived in India in the early 17 th century and, unlike the Portuguese, focused primarily on commercial dominance, particularly in the spice trade. They established a Dutch East
India Company, with trading posts in various parts of India, including, on the west coast, Surat, Bharuch, Cochin (Kochi), and on the east coast Nagapattinam and Masulipatnam (present- day Machilipatnam). Their most significant presence was in the
Malabar region of Kerala, where they displaced the Portuguese from several trading centres.
Fig. 4.5. A depiction of the surrender of Dutch forces to King Marthanda Varma of
Travancore after the Battle of Colachel, 1741 CE (Padmanabhapuram Palace).
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1
The Dutch presence in India was ultimately limited; it declined significantly after their defeat at the Battle of Colachel in
1741, where the forces of Travancore under King Marthanda
Varma decisively defeated the Dutch both on land and at sea (the Travancore kingdom was in the southern part of present- day Kerala). This battle was a rare instance of an Asian power successfully repelling a European colonial force.
The French: colonial ambitions
The French entered India later, establishing their first trading post at Surat in 1668 and subsequently at Pondicherry (present- day Puducherry) in 1674, where they established their East
India Company (Compagnie des Indes Orientales) and developed ambitious plans to establish a French empire in India.
Dupleix, who served as Governor-General of French India from
1742 to 1754, pioneered several colonial strategies that would later be adopted by the British. In particular, he trained Indian soldiers in European military techniques, creating disciplined infantry soldiers known as sepoys. Dupleix also developed the strategy of indirect rule through puppet Indian rulers, who were installed through interventions in local succession disputes.
The French colonial ambitions in India were ultimately checked during the Carnatic Wars (1746–1763), a series of conflicts between Britain and France. Despite initial successes under
Dupleix, who captured Madras (present-day Chennai) in 1746, the French ultimately lost ground to the British and their colony was reduced to Pondicherry and a few smaller enclaves.
Like the Dutch, and unlike the Portuguese, the French colonial powers did not much intervene in Indians’ social and religious life. A rare exception was the destruction in 1748 of Pondicherry’s large Vedapurishwaran temple, ordered by Dupleix on the persistent request of Pondicherry’s Jesuit priests and Dupleix’s own wife, with a view to asserting the dominance of Christianity.
Generally, however, the French had to be content with a modest amount of trade with India.
Reprint 2026-27
Tapestry of the Past
4 – The Colonial Era in India
Fig. 4.6. A 1764 plan of Pondicherry showing the city enclosed in fortifications and grid planning. The large structure facing the sea (at the bottom) was the fort. (The top of the plan points to the west.)
Enter the British
Britain dominated the Indian subcontinent for nearly two centuries. How did this happen? Many books have dissected the methods of the British rulers; we will not attempt to tell a complete story, but will focus on the main aspects of their colonial presence in India.
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1
From traders to rulers
The British conquest of India is one of history’s most remarkable examples of how a trading company could transform into an imperial power. Unlike classic conquests, the British takeover of
India was gradual, calculated, and often disguised as commercial enterprise rather than military invasion.
The English East India Company was established as a trading company and was granted a royal charter by Queen Elizabeth I, which gave it special powers — to raise a private army, for instance. Nevertheless, its agents initially kept up a pretence of being mere traders, which allowed them, in the 17 th century, to establish footholds along India’s coast with minimal resistance:
Surat, Madras, Bombay and Calcutta among the first. Local rulers did not mind these trading posts, as they generally welcomed foreign trade (which, let us recall, was a longstanding practice in
India). These modest beginnings concealed the Company’s long- term ambitions.
LET US EXPLORE
Before you read further, have a good look at the painting on the first page of this chapter. It was specially ordered for the
London headquarters of the East India Company and is over three metres long. Observe every aspect of it — the people in it, the objects, the symbols and the attitudes. Form groups of four or five students and let each group present its conclusions as regards the messages the painting conveys.
(You will find our answers a few pages down, when we return to the painting, but avoid looking at them right now!)
The strategy of ‘divide and rule’
While maintaining an appearance of traders, the Company’s agents cultivated political relationships with local rulers, offering military support to some against their rivals, thus inserting themselves into Indian political conflicts and emerging as power brokers rather than foreign invaders. They would also
Reprint 2026-27
Tapestry of the Past
4 – The Colonial Era in India play on rivalries between regional rulers or succession disputes within ruling houses, so as to benefit from these conflicts — the ‘divide and rule’ policy. The
British were equally skilled at exploiting existing divisions within Indian society: they identified and often encouraged tensions between religious communities, for instance.
The Battle of Plassey (1757)
exemplifies this approach.
When tensions arose between Siraj-ud-daulah, the Nawab of Bengal, and the East India Company officials led by Robert
Clive, the latter identified disgruntled elements within the Nawab’s court. Clive hatched a conspiracy with
Mir Jafar, the Nawab’s military commander, promising to install him as the new Nawab in exchange for his betrayal. The battle took place at Palashi (Plassey as the British spelt it), some 150 kilometres north of present-day Kolkata. Some French forces assisted the Nawab, but Mir Jafar’s forces — constituting the majority of the Nawab’s army — stood aside, ensuring a British victory despite their smaller number. Even today, ‘Mir Jafar’ in
India remains a synonym for ‘traitor’!
By positioning themselves as a kingmaker, the East India
Company gradually established control over increasingly large territories. In the 19 th century, it went a step further and introduced the infamous Doctrine of Lapse, according to which any princely state would be annexed if its ruler died
Fig. 4.7. Clive leading the East India Company’s troops at Plassey, 1757 (painting by William Heath, 1821)
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 without a natural male heir. This deliberately disregarded the
Hindu tradition of adoption, which was a legitimate means of succession in Indian royal houses.
DON’T MISS OUT
In the Indian context, a princely state was a region that remained under the rule of an Indian prince, maharaja or nawab, but which had accepted British protection and guidance in exchange for maintaining internal autonomy.
There were hundreds of them, from large ones (such as
Hyderabad, Mysore, Travancore or Jammu & Kashmir) to smaller ones. At the time of India’s Independence, there were over 500 princely states, covering about 40 per cent of the
Subcontinent.
The Doctrine of Lapse led to the annexation of numerous states, contributing to the expansion of the territorial control of the
British. This created much resentment in sections of Indian society and contributed to the 1857 Rebellion (to which we return below).
Another stratagem (known as ‘subsidiary alliance’) was to install a British ‘Resident’ in the courts of Indian rulers to protect them against internal or external threats; in exchange, they would have to maintain British troops at their own expense and conduct foreign relations only through the British. While appearing to preserve the sovereignty of princely states, the system effectively transferred real power to the British while burdening Indian rulers with the costs of their own subjugation!
The ruler of Hyderabad was among the first to enter such an alliance in 1798; several others soon followed. These so-called alliances allowed the British to control vast territories without the administrative costs of direct rule, creating what was called
‘an empire on the cheap
