Economic Life Around Us
7 – Factors of Production
Factors of Production
For a country like India, the largest contribution to growth and productivity will probably come about from more efficiently using land, labour and capital, thus they must be used more efficiently.
— Bibek Debroy,
Chairman, Economic Advisory Council to the Prime Minister (2017-24)
1. What are the factors of production?
2. How are these factors interconnected?
3. What is the role of human capital in production, and what are its facilitators?
Questions
Fig. 7.1.
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1
Introduction
Have you ever wondered how your clothes, shoes, school bag, furniture, phone, computer, etc., are made? Every product around you goes through a production process before it finally reaches you. This production process involves using resources or inputs required to produce the final product. The resources or inputs used in producing goods and services are hence called factors of production.
Businesses combine various inputs or factors of production to create goods and services, which also generate opportunities for people to engage in economic activities.
Business:
A firm, a factory, etc., which produces or sells goods or provides a service.
Meet Ratna, who runs a small restaurant named Pause Point, on the city outskirts. Popular among highway travellers for its tasty, high-quality food, Pause Point is growing with a team of seven people who assist Ratna in managing the business. When she started five years ago, she had to choose a location, organise money for rent and equipment, hire staff, buy ingredients, and plan how to make her dream a success.
Fig. 7.2. A glimpse at the production of some goods
Reprint 2026-27
Economic Life Around Us
7 – Factors of Production
LET’S EXPLORE
Æ In small groups, study the economic activities around your locality. What are the different types of goods and services being made or provided?
Æ Here’s a small report that Latha, Asha, Mohan, and Kiran made. You can make your own report for shops of your choice.
Types of locality
Goods produced or services provided
Types of inputs required shops 13 Food grains, milk, bread
Packaged goods, perishables, storage space
Restaurants/ food stalls 8 Cooked meals, snacks, beverages
Raw ingredients like vegetables and fruits, gas, utensils;
cook/helper
Vegetable vendors 15 Fresh vegetables and fruits
Fresh produce, baskets, weighing scale, cart or stall repair shops 4
Mobile repair, accessories
Tools, spare parts, knowledge and skills of mobile components and functions parlours 3
Haircut, grooming, beauty services
Scissors, creams, beauty products, water, electricity
Looking at your group’s report, think about the following:
Æ Where do people get the money that they need for their business?
Æ Where did the hairdresser get trained?
Æ Who taught the food vendors to cook?
Æ What motivated the business owners to start their business?
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1
In economics, the inputs used in a production process or the factors of production are classified into four types — land, labour, capital and entrepreneurship. Technology is a facilitator and a crucial factor that enables businesses to produce more goods with the same or fewer inputs. Let’s learn more about these inputs in the sections ahead!
Factors of Production
Land (natural resources)
The word ‘land’ in economics encompasses not only geographical land but also natural resources like soil, forests, water, air, sunlight, minerals, oil, and natural gas. Recollect the chapter on
Natural Resources and Their Use, where we discussed different types of resources that nature gifts to us and how we use them.
Businesses either purchase the required land or pay rent to use it for a period of time.
LET’S EXPLORE
Revisit the table in your report. Which of the items on your list can be labelled as ‘land’?
Labour (human resources)
Labour is essential in production, involving physical and mental effort. Carpenters, farmers, construction workers, teachers, and doctors use varying levels of physical strength, knowledge, and skill. Everyone contributes differently through their work, helping create goods and services for society’s needs.
People as a resource
Human beings play a key role in economic activities and production processes as they apply their knowledge, skills, and decision-making abilities to create goods and services. For example, a police officer maintains law and order, a scientist invents new technologies, a chef develops new recipes, etc.
They all require a special set of knowledge and skills to perform well. Of course, they all must be dedicated to their work to do
The ability to do an activity well with practice training.
Reprint 2026-27
Economic Life Around Us
7 – Factors of Production a good job. The word labour refers to the physical and mental effort used in production. However, human capital refers to the specialised skills, knowledge, abilities and expertise required to perform that labour. Thus, human capital is not just the basic efforts of labour but also the quality and efficiency of that labour.
Facilitators of human capital
Education and training
Education helps individuals gain knowledge, starting with basic literacy and extending to expertise in specific fields. What you
Fig. 7.5. Carpenter Fig. 7.6. Software developer
Fig. 7.3. Worker at a tea plantation Fig. 7.4. Chemical engineer
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 learn in school enriches your knowledge and prepares you to solve real-world problems. For example, a civil engineering student learns principles of design and materials, which are applied to building infrastructure like roads and bridges. The challenge lies in creating durable, cost-efficient, and eco- friendly solutions. This is achieved through training, such as observing construction sites, testing materials, understanding safety procedures and hands-on application. With education and training, individuals are prepared to excel in their careers.
Healthcare
Good health supports cognitive development, allowing children to attend school regularly and learn better. Similarly, workers are able to give their best, physically and mentally, when they are of sound body. They are able to do more in shorter time periods, be creative, and do not have to be away from work due to ill health.
THINK ABOUT IT
How do infrastructure and healthcare systems like hospitals, primary healthcare centres, doctors, pharmacies, diagnostic labs, etc., contribute to developing human capital?
Cognitive:
It refers to the process of learning, knowing and understanding.
Training:
It is the process of learning the required skills to do a particular job or activity.
Fig. 7.7. Education and training
Reprint 2026-27
Economic Life Around Us
7 – Factors of Production
Social and cultural influences
A culture of hard work, continuous improvement, and endeavouring to do things well has helped countries to move forward. There is a Japanese concept called kaizen, which means ‘continuous improvement’. This concept has been applied in Japan since the mid-1940s and has helped
Japan achieve higher standards of living for its people.
Another example could be that of the German work ethic, which is deeply rooted in their history. Germany is renowned for its high-quality industrial output. They place a high value on punctuality, attention to detail and quality.
These qualities of their human capital contributed to their rise as a global leader in technology and manufacturing.
LET’S EXPLORE
Æ Let’s do a small experiment. Make a list of 10 working adults in your family and neighbourhood. Ask them to describe the culture at their workplace. Share notes with your classmates. What did you discover? What are some adjectives that occur more frequently?
Æ In the Tapestry chapters, you have seen examples of the art and architecture in India across several centuries. What do you think are the factors that enabled their creators to achieve such high levels of excellence? Discuss in groups and share in class.
Challenges to human capital
Our nation has come a long way in various aspects of human capital since independence. Literacy is an important characteristic of the population and helps enhance the skills and productivity of human capital. The
Adult Literacy Rate in India is 85 per cent for males and
70 per cent for females as of 2023, as per the World Bank estimates. Despite progress in many areas, India faces challenges in developing human capital.
Productivity:
Ability to do more in a particular time
Adult literacy rate: Percentage of people aged
15 and above who can read and write with understanding a short, simple statement about their everyday
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1
THINK ABOUT IT
Æ Shivay, a student at Saraswati Vidyalaya in Grade 8, had to drop out of school two years back as his father lost his job. How do you think the loss of schooling years will affect Shivay when he grows up?
Æ What problems could businesses face when they do not find workers with the required skills?
According to the Economic Survey of
India 2024, 65 per cent of people in
India are below the age of 35 years.
This means that India has a young, productive population, which may help the country reap the benefits of a demographic dividend. The demographic dividend refers to the benefit a country gets when it has a large number of young and working people. When more people are working and earning, and fewer people depend on them, the country can grow businesses and improve living standards. To take advantage of this potential, individuals must have access to quality education, health, training, and skilling, which would contribute to the nation’s progress. You will learn more about this in the year ahead in the chapter on Demographics.
THINK ABOUT IT
Are some jobs more important than others? What would happen if nobody cleaned the streets, collected the trash, farmers stopped cultivating the crops, doctors were not available to treat patients, and so on?
Today, there is a vast variety of jobs requiring different kinds of skills. However, India has had a rich legacy of skill-based knowledge systems and workmanship.
Fig. 7.8. Students writing an exam
Reprint 2026-27
Economic Life Around Us
7 – Factors of Production
India’s ancient skill heritage
For ancient Indians, work was a form of expressing their nature and striving for perfection, an offering to the deity or the receiver, as the case may be. It had to be created or done with devotion. The tools (a type of technology) used were worshipped;
this tradition continues as Viśhwakarmā pūjā or Āyudha pūjā.
So, creating products involved a unique blend of kalā (art) and vidyā (knowledge). Knowledge was passed on from generation to generation, and also built on. The śhilpa śhāstras are ancient texts that contain detailed design guidelines on sculptures, paintings, buildings, wooden items, and jewellery. For example, texts on sculpture prescribe exact specifications regarding postures, colours, measurements, and proportions of figures.
DON’T MISS OUT
Generations of families of sculptors have worked on constructing India’s temples over centuries. They used their skills without expecting to see the finished outcome. They pursued excellence, considering work as worship by practising regularly and learning new techniques.
Fig. 7.9. Re-creation of a 5th
-century stitched ship
Stitched shipbuilding
Indians used a unique stitching technique dating back over
2000 years to make ships and boats, which they used to conduct maritime trade and cultural exchanges across the Indian Ocean.
The technique involved stitching wooden planks together using cords instead of nails, which made them flexible and helped the ships navigate the Indian Ocean with ease.
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1
LET’S EXPLORE
Æ Many of the traditional techniques of production have either disappeared or are on a decline. For example, the stitching of ships saw a severe decline after the arrival of
Europeans in the Indian Ocean in the 16 th century. This technique is now used for small fishing boats.
Æ Why do you think the use of indigenous techniques has declined? Discuss in the class.
Æ Find out some techniques and products from your region that showcase human effort and skill. Explain briefly using drawings and text in the class.
Fig. 7.10. Machinery Fig. 7.11. Loans
Businesses also require capital that comprises monetary resources and durable assets like machinery, tools, equipment, vehicles, vending carts, computers, shops, factories, office buildings, etc., for their day-to-day operations. Just as Ratna would have required money to take the land on lease, buy the furniture and kitchen equipment, etc. These are all called
‘capital’ — money plus human-made resources that are used to produce goods and services.
Capital is essential to a manufacturing unit or a services sector enterprise. But where do businesses get the capital? Generally,
Capital:
In economics, any asset, physical or financial, used to produce goods and services.
Reprint 2026-27
Economic Life Around Us
7 – Factors of Production personal savings, family, and friends are the first source of funds and support for individuals when they start a business, just as
Ratna did when she started her business. However, the funds were insufficient for Ratna to start the business, so she took a loan from the bank to meet the shortfall. She paid interest along with a part of her loan amount over a period of time. Similarly, large companies require a lot of money to expand their business;
hence, they raise money from the general public through the stock market. The stock market is a special type of market where shares are bought and sold. Large companies raise money from the public by offering them a share of the profits, called a dividend. In other words, big businesses can raise money or financial capital through such a market and can sell shares of their business. You will learn the exact mechanism of how this works in the higher grades.
LET’S EXPLORE
Identify a factory in your region. Find out how much capital may have been invested in the construction of the factory (you may provide an estimate). What kinds of equipment does the factory use to create its finished products?
Entrepreneurship
Entrepreneurship means starting your own business or creating something new to solve a problem. An entrepreneur is a person
Dividend:
An amount of money regularly by a company shareholders out of its profits.
Interest:
The amount of money paid by the borrower of a loan to the lender for using their money for a specific time.
Fig. 7.12. Bamboo and cane products,
Arunachal Pradesh
Fig. 7.13. Food processing
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 who comes up with an idea, takes risks, gathers other factors of production, and works hard to make their startup idea successful.
An entrepreneur’s vision for solving a problem helps bring innovative products and services to the market that benefit society and the nation. At the same time, they also create job opportunities and support livelihoods. In return, they derive a deep sense of satisfaction from seeing their dreams become a reality and serving the people.
Thus, an entrepreneur is one who:
Fig. 7.14. Pottery products, Delhi Fig. 7.15. Petrochemical plant
Identifies a problem and is resolute to solve it with an innovative solution
Combines of production
Takes risks by investing money and
Makes key decisions regarding the operation and functioning of his/her business
Contributes to the welfare of society with his/ her innovation
An Entrepreneur
Fig. 7.16. Tasks performed by an entrepreneur
A startup is an entrepreneurial with limited resources that aims at rapid growth and expansion leveraging technology.
Reprint 2026-27
Economic Life Around Us
7 – Factors of Production
The man who dreamed big for India
J.R.D. Tata — entrepreneur, industrialist and philanthropist
Jehangir Ratanji Dadabhoy (J.R.D.)
Tata was one of India’s greatest entrepreneurs and played a big role in building modern India. He was born in 1904 and became the head of the
Tata Group, one of the largest business groups in the country. He believed that businesses should not only make money but also help society. He started
India’s first airline, Tata Airlines, in
1932, which later became Air India. Under his leadership, the
Tata Group expanded into many areas like steel, cars, power, and chemicals. J.R.D. Tata was also known for caring about his workers and believed in providing them with good working conditions. He was a man of vision, hard work, and honesty.
In 1992, he received the Bharat Ratna, India’s highest civilian award, for his great service to the nation.
THINK ABOUT IT
Æ What could be the lessons for young entrepreneurs that you can gather from the above case?
Æ Does the existing knowledge of the entrepreneur help in finding solutions to the problem at hand? Or do they need to seek other sources?
Æ Is profit the only motivation for an entrepreneur? Why or why not?
Æ What are the other personality traits required to be a successful entrepreneur?
Fig. 7.17. J.R.D. Tata
Reprint 2026-27
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1
Technology: An Enabler of Production
Technology means the application of scientific knowledge. For example, a camera converts light into electrical signals to create a digital image. Any production-related activity uses some form of technology. Some early forms of technology that have existed since ancient times are still in use today.
Today, newer and advanced technological developments are applied in various areas, making our lives easier. For example, payments can be made at the click of a button through UPI (Unified Payments Interface); farmers can get advance weather updates; Global Positioning
