16 CHEMISTRY cannot combine and molecules of oxygen or hydrogen containing two atoms did not exist.
Avogadro’s proposal was published in the
French Journal de Physique. In spite of being correct, it did not gain much support.
After about 50 years, in 1860, the first international conference on chemistry was held in Karlsruhe, Germany, to resolve various ideas. At the meeting, Stanislao
Cannizaro presented a sketch of a course of chemical philosophy, which emphasised on the importance of Avogadro’s work.
1.6 Dalton’S atomic theory
Although the origin of the idea that matter is composed of small indivisible particles called
‘a-tomio’ (meaning, indivisible), dates back to the time of Democritus, a Greek Philosopher (460–
370 BC), it again started emerging as a result of several experimental studies which led to the laws mentioned
In 1808, Dalton published
‘A New System of Chemical
Philosophy’, in which he proposed the following :
1. Matter consists of indivisible atoms.
2. All atoms of a given element have identical properties, including identical mass. Atoms of different elements differ in mass.
3. Compounds are formed when atoms of different elements combine in a fixed ratio.
4. Chemical reactions involve reorganisation of atoms. These are neither created nor destroyed in a chemical reaction.
Dalton’s theory could explain the laws of chemical combination. However, it could not explain the laws of gaseous volumes. It could not provide the reason for combining of atoms, which was answered later by other scientists.
1.7 atomic anD molecUlar maSSeS
After having some idea about the terms atoms and molecules, it is appropriate here to understand what do we mean by atomic and molecular masses.
1.7.1 atomic mass
The atomic mass or the mass of an atom is actually very-very small because atoms are extremely small. Today, we have sophisticated techniques e.g., mass spectrometry for determining the atomic masses fairly accurately. But in the nineteenth century, scientists could determine the mass of one atom relative to another by experimental means, as has been mentioned earlier.
Hydrogen, being the lightest atom was arbitrarily assigned a mass of 1 (without any units) and other elements were assigned masses relative to it. However, the present system of atomic masses is based on carbon-12 as the standard and has been agreed upon in 1961. Here, Carbon-12 is one of the isotopes of carbon and can be represented as 12 C. In this system, 12 C is assigned a mass of exactly 12 atomic mass unit (amu) and masses of all other atoms are given relative to this standard. One atomic mass unit is defined as a mass exactly equal to one-twelfth of the mass of one carbon – 12
John Dalton (1776–1884)
Fig. 1.9 Two volumes of hydrogen react with one volume of oxygen to give two volumes of water vapour
Reprint 2026-27
