F e d e r a l i s m
7 The federal system thus has dual objectives: to safeguard and promote unity of the country, while at the same time accommodate regional diversity. Therefore, two aspects are crucial for the institutions and practice of federalism. Governments at different levels should agree to some rules of power-sharing. They should also trust that each would abide by its part of the agreement.
An ideal federal system has both aspects : mutual trust and agreement to live together.
The exact balance of power between the central and the state government varies from one federation to another. This balance depends mainly on the historical context in which the federation was formed. There are two kinds of routes through which federations have been formed. The first route involves independent States coming together on their own to form a bigger unit, so that by pooling sovereignty and retaining identity, they can increase their security. This type of ‘ coming together’ federations include the
USA, Switzerland and Australia. In this first category of federations, all the constituent States usually have equal power and are strong vis-à-vis the federal government.
The second route is where a large country decides to divide its power between the constituent
States and the national government.
India, Spain and Belgium are examples of this kind of ‘ holding together’ federations. In this second category, the Central Government tends to be more powerful vis-à- vis the States. Very often different constituent units of the federation have unequal powers. Some units are granted special powers.
If federalism works only in big countries, why did Belgium adopt it?
Jurisdiction: The area over which someone has legal authority. The area may be defined in terms of geographical boundaries or in terms of certain kinds of subjects.
In this sense, federations are contrasted with unitary governments.
Under the unitary system, either there is only one level of government or the sub-units are subordinate to the central government. The central government can pass on orders to the provincial or the local government.
But in a federal system, the central government cannot order the state government to do something. State government has powers of its own for which it is not answerable to the central government. Both these governments are separately answerable to the people.
Let us look at some of the key features of federalism :
1 There are two or more levels (or tiers) of government.
2 Different tiers of government govern the same citizens, but each tier has its own jurisdiction in specific matters of legislation, taxation and administration.
3 The jurisdictions of the respective levels or tiers of government are specified in the constitution. So the existence and authority of each tier of government is constitutionally guaranteed.
4 The fundamental provisions of the constitution cannot be unilaterally changed by one level of government. Such changes require the consent of both the levels of government.
5 Courts have the power to interpret the constitution and the powers of different levels of government. The highest court acts as an umpire if disputes arise between different levels of government in the exercise of their respective powers.
6 Sources of revenue for each level of government are clearly specified to ensure its financial autonomy.
Reprint 2026-27
D e m o c r a t i c P o l i t i c s
Isn’t that strange? Did our constitution makers not know about federalism? Or did they wish to avoid talking about it?
Some Nepalese citizens were discussing the proposals on the adoption of federalism in their new constitution. This is what some of them said:
Khag Raj: I don’t like federalism. It would lead to reservation of seats for different caste groups as in India.
Sarita: Ours in not a very big country. We don’t need federalism.
Babu Lal: I am hopeful that the Terai areas will get more autonomy if they get their own state government.
Ram Ganesh: I like federalism because it will mean that powers that were earlier enjoyed by the king will now be exercised by our elected representatives.
If you were participating in this conversation, what would be your response to each of these? Which of these reflect a wrong understanding of what federalism is?
What makes India a federal country?
We have earlier seen how small countries like Belgium and Sri Lanka face so many problems of managing diversity. What about a vast country like India, with so many languages, religions and regions? What are the power sharing arrangements in our country?
Let us begin with the Constitution.
India had emerged as an independent nation after a painful and bloody partition. Soon after Independence, several princely states became a part of the country. The Constitution declared India as a Union of States.
Although it did not use the word federation, the Indian Union is based on the principles of federalism.
Let us go back to the seven features of federalism mentioned above. We can see that all these features apply to the provisions of the Indian Constitution. The
Constitution originally provided for a two-tier system of government, the Union Government or what we call the Central Government, representing the Union of India and the State governments. Later, a third tier of federalism was added in the form of Panchayats and
Municipalities. As in any federation, these different tiers enjoy separate jurisdiction. The Constitution clearly provided a three-fold distribution of legislative powers between the Union Government and the State Governments. Thus, it contains three lists:
 Union List includes subjects of national importance, such as defence of the country, foreign affairs, banking, communications and currency. They are included in this list because we need a uniform policy on these matters throughout the country. The Union
Government alone can make laws relating to the subjects mentioned in the Union List.
 State List contains subjects of State and local importance, such as police, trade, commerce, agriculture and irrigation. The State
Governments alone can make laws relating to the subjects mentioned in the State List.
 Concurrent List includes subjects of common interest to both the Union Government as well as the State Governments, such
What makes India a federal country?
Reprint 2026-27
F e d e r a l i s m as education, forest, trade unions, marriage, adoption and succession.
Both the Union as well as the State
Governments can make laws on the subjects mentioned in this list.
If their laws conflict with each other, the law made by the Union
Government will prevail.
What about subjects that do not fall in any of the three lists? Or subjects like computer software that came up after the constitution was made?
According to our constitution, the
Union Government has the power to legislate on these ‘residuary’ subjects.
We noted above that most federations that are formed by
‘holding together’ do not give equal power to its constituent units. Thus, all States in the Indian Union do not have identical powers. Some States enjoy a special status. States such as Assam, Nagaland, Arunachal
Pradesh and Mizoram enjoy special powers under certain provisions of the Constitution of India (Article
371) due to their peculiar social and historical circumstances. These special powers are especially enjoyed in relation to the protection of land rights of indigenous peoples, their culture and also preferential employment in government services.
Indians who are not permanent residents of this State cannot buy land or house here. Similar special provisions exist for some other States of India as well.
Listen to one national and one regional news bulletin broadcast by All India
Radio daily for one week. Make a list of news items related to government policies or decisions by classifying these into the following categories:
 News items that relate only to the Central Government,
 News items that relate only to your or any other State Government,
 News items about the relationship between the Central and State Governments.
There are some units of the
Indian Union which enjoy very little power. These are areas which are too small to become an independent
State but which could not be merged with any of the existing States.
These areas, like Chandigarh, or
Lakshadweep or the capital city of
Delhi, are called Union Territories.
These territories do not have the powers of a State. The Central
Government has special powers in running these areas.
This sharing of power between the Union Government and the State
Governments is basic to the structure of the Constitution. It is not easy to make changes to this power sharing arrangement. The Parliament cannot on its own change this arrangement.
Any change to it has to be first passed by both the Houses of Parliament with at least two-thirds majority.
Then it has to be ratified by the legislatures of at least half of the total States.
The judiciary plays an important role in overseeing the implementation of constitutional provisions and procedures. In case of any dispute about the division of powers, the
High Courts and the Supreme Court make a decision. The Union and
State Governments have the power to raise resources by levying taxes in order to carry on the government and the responsibilities assigned to each of them.
If agriculture and commerce are state subjects, why do we have ministers of agriculture and commerce in the
Union cabinet?
Reprint 2026-27
D e m o c r a t i c P o l i t i c s
 Pokharan, the place where India conducted its nuclear tests, lies in Rajasthan. Suppose the Government of Rajasthan was opposed to the Central Government’s nuclear policy, could it prevent the Government of India from conducting the nuclear tests?
 Suppose the Government of Sikkim plans to introduce new textbooks in its schools. But the Union Government does not like the style and content of the new textbooks. In that case, does the state government need to take permission from the Union Government before these textbooks can be launched?
 Suppose the Chief Ministers of Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Orissa have different policies on how their state police should respond to the naxalites. Can the
Prime Minister of India intervene and pass an order that all the Chief Ministers will have to obey?
Reprint 2026-27
F e d e r a l i s m
Constitutional provisions are necessary for the success of federalism but these are not sufficient. If the federal experiment has succeeded in India, it is not merely because of the clearly laid out constitutional provisions. The real success of federalism in India can be attributed to the nature of democratic politics in our country. This ensured that the spirit of federalism, respect for diversity and desire for living together became shared ideals in our country. Let us look at some of the major ways in which this happened.
Linguistic States
The creation of linguistic States was the first and a major test for democratic politics in our country.
If you look at the political map of
India when it began its journey as a democracy in 1947 and that of 2019, you will be surprised by the extent of the changes. Many old States have vanished and many new States have been created. Areas, boundaries and names of the States have been changed.
In 1947, the boundaries of several old States of India were changed in order to create new States. This was done to ensure that people who spoke the same language lived in the same State. Some States were created not on the basis of language but to recognise differences based on culture, ethnicity or geography.
These include States like Nagaland,
Uttarakhand and Jharkhand.
 Has your village / town / city remained under the same State since Independence? If not, what was the name of the earlier
 Can you identify names of three
States in 1947 that have been changed later?
 Identify any three States which have been carved out of bigger
How is federalism practised?
Reprint 2026-27
D e m o c r a t i c P o l i t i c s
When the demand for the formation of States on the basis of language was raised, some national leaders feared that it would lead to the disintegration of the country.
The Central Government resisted linguistic States for some time.
But the experience has shown that the formation of linguistic States has actually made the country more united. It has also made administration easier.
Language policy
A second test for Indian federation is the language policy. Our Constitution did not give the status of national language to any one language. Hindi was identified as the official language.
But Hindi is the mother tongue of only about 40 per cent of Indians.
Therefore, there were many safeguards to protect other languages. Besides
Hindi, there are 21 other languages recognised as Scheduled Languages by the Constitution. A candidate in an examination conducted for the
Central Government positions may opt to take the examination in any of these languages. States too have their own official languages. Much of the government work takes place in the official language of the concerned State.
Unlike Sri Lanka, the leaders of our country adopted a very cautious attitude in spreading the use of Hindi. According to the
Constitution, the use of English for official purposes was to stop in
1965. However, many non-Hindi speaking States demanded that the use of English continue. In Tamil
Nadu, this movement took a violent form. The Central Government responded by agreeing to continue the use of English along with Hindi for official purposes. Many critics think that this solution favoured the
English-speaking elite. Promotion of Hindi continues to be the official policy of the Government of India.
Promotion does not mean that the
Central Government can impose
Hindi on States where people speak a different language. The flexibility shown by Indian political leaders helped our country avoid the kind of situation that Sri Lanka finds itself in.
Centre-State relations
Restructuring the Centre-State relations is one more way in which federalism has been strengthened in practice. How the constitutional arrangements for sharing power work in reality depends to a large extent on how the ruling parties and leaders follow these arrangements.
For a long time, the same party ruled both at the Centre and in most of the States. This meant that the
State Governments did not exercise their rights as autonomous federal units. As and when the ruling party at the State level was different, the parties that ruled at the Centre tried to undermine the power of the
States. In those days, the Central
Government would often misuse the Constitution to dismiss the State
Governments that were controlled by rival parties. This undermined the spirit of federalism.
All this changed significantly after 1990. This period saw the rise of regional political parties in many States of the country. This was also the beginning of the era of coalition governments at the
Centre. Since no single party got a clear majority in the Lok Sabha, the major national parties had to enter into an alliance with many parties including several regional parties to form a government at the Centre.
Coalition government:
A government formed by the coming together of at least two political parties. Usually partners in a coalition form a political alliance and adopt a common programme.
Why Hindi?
Bangla or
Reprint 2026-27
F e d e r a l i s m
Here are two cartoons showing the relationship between Centre and States. Should the
State go to the Centre with a begging bowl? How can the leader of a coalition keep the partners of government satisfied?
suggesting that regionalism is good for our democracy? Are you serious?
The States Plead for More Powers
© Kutty -
Laughing with Kutty
© Ajith Ninan -
India Today Book of Cartoons
Perils of Running a Coalition Government
This led to a new culture of power sharing and respect for the autonomy of State Governments.
This trend was supported by a major judgement of the Supreme
Court that made it difficult for the
Central Government to dismiss state governments in an arbitrary manner.
Thus, federal power sharing is more effective today than it was in the early years after the Constitution came into force.
Reprint 2026-27
D e m o c r a t i c P o l i t i c s
Linguistic diversity of India
How many languages do we have in India? The answer depends on how one counts it. The latest information that we have is from the Census of India held in 2011.
This census recorded more than
1300 distinct languages which people mentioned as their mother tongues. These languages were grouped together under some major languages. For example, languages like Bhojpuri, Magadhi,
Bundelkhandi, Chhattisgarhi,
Rajasthani and many others were grouped together under ‘Hindi’.
Even after this grouping, the Census found 121 major languages. Of these, 22 languages are now included in the Eighth Schedule of the Indian
Constitution and are therefore called ‘Scheduled Languages’.
Others are called
‘non-Scheduled Languages’. In terms of languages, India is perhaps the most diverse country in the world.
A look at the enclosed table makes it clear that no one language is the mother tongue of the majority of our population.
The largest language, Hindi, is the mother tongue of only about 44 per cent Indians. If we add to that all those who knew Hindi as their second or third language, the total number was still less than 50 per cent in 2011. As for English, only
0.02 per cent Indians recorded it as their mother tongue. Another
11 per cent knew it as a second or third language.
Read this table carefully, but you need not memorise it. Just do the following:
 Make a bar or pie chart on the basis of this information.
 Prepare a map of linguistic diversity of India by shading the region where each of these languages is spoken on the map of India.
 Find out about any three languages that are spoken in
India but are not in
