F e d e r a l i s m
Exercises
1. Locate the following States on a blank outline political map of India:
Manipur, Sikkim, Chhattisgarh and Goa.
2. Identify and shade three federal countries (other than India) on a blank outline political map of the world.
3. Point out one feature in the practice of federalism in India that is similar to and one feature that is different from that of Belgium.
4. What is the main difference between a federal form of government and a unitary one? Explain with an example.
5. State any two differences between the local government before and after the Constitutional amendment in 1992.
6. Fill in the blanks:
Since the United States is a ___________________ type of federation, all the constituent States have equal powers and States are ______________vis-à-vis the federal government. But India is a
_____________________ type of federation and some States have more power than others. In India, the ____________ government has more powers.
7. Here are three reactions to the language policy followed in India.
Give an argument and an example to support any of these positions.
Sangeeta: The policy of accommodation has strengthened national unity.
Arman: Language-based States have divided us by making everyone conscious of their language.
Harish: This policy has only helped to consolidate the dominance of English over all other languages.
8. The distinguishing feature of a federal government is:
(a) National government gives some powers to the provincial governments.
(b) Power is distributed among the legislature, executive and judiciary.
(c) Elected officials exercise supreme power in the government.
(d) Governmental power is divided between different levels of government.
9. A few subjects in various Lists of the Indian Constitution are given here. Group them under the Union, State and Concurrent Lists as provided in the table below.
A. Defence; B. Police; C. Agriculture; D. Education;
E. Banking; F. Forests; G. Communications; H. Trade; I. Marriages
Union List
State List
Concurrent List
Reprint 2026-27
D e m o c r a t i c P o l i t i c s (a) D A B C (b) B C D A (c) A C D B (d) C D A B
Exercises
10. Examine the following pairs that give the level of government in India and the powers of the government at that level to make laws on the subjects mentioned against each. Which of the following pairs is not correctly matched?
11. Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below the lists:
List I List II
1. Union of India A. Prime Minister
2. State B. Sarpanch
3. Municipal Corporation C. Governor
4. Gram Panchayat D. Mayor
12. Consider the following two statements.
A. In a federation, the powers of the federal and provincial governments are clearly demarcated.
B. India is a federation because the powers of the Union and State
Governments are specified in the Constitution and they have exclusive jurisdiction on their respective subjects.
C. Sri Lanka is a federation because the country is divided into provinces.
D. India is no longer a federation because some powers of the States have been devolved to the local government bodies.
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) A, B and C (b) A, C and D (c) A and B only (d) B and C only (a) State government State List (b) Central government Union List (c) Central and State governments Concurrent List (d) Local governments Residuary powers
Reprint 2026-27
G e n d e r , R e l i g i o n a n d C a s t e
Chapter 3
Religion and
Overview
The existence of social diversity does not threaten democracy. Political expression of social differences is possible and sometimes quite desirable in a democratic system. In this chapter we apply these ideas to the practice of democracy in India. We look at three kinds of social differences that can take the form of social divisions and inequalities. These are social differences based on gender, religion and caste. In each case we look at the nature of this division in India and how it gets expressed in politics.
We also ask whether different expressions based on these differences are healthy or otherwise in a democracy.
Reprint 2026-27
D e m o c r a t i c P o l i t i c s
Gender and politics
Let us begin with gender division.
This is a form of hierarchical social division seen everywhere, but is rarely recognised in the study of politics. The gender division tends to be understood as natural and unchangeable. However, it is not based on biology but on social expectations and stereotypes.
Public/private division
Boys and girls are brought up to believe that the main responsibility of women is housework and bringing up children. This is reflected in a sexual division of labour in most families: women do all work inside the home such as cooking, cleaning, washing clothes, tailoring, looking after children, etc., and men do all the work outside the home. It is not that men cannot do housework; they simply think that it is for women to attend to these things. When these jobs are paid for, men are ready to take up these works. Most tailors or cooks in hotels are men. Similarly, it is not that women do not work outside their home. In villages, women fetch water, collect fuel and work in the fields. In urban areas, poor women work as domestic helper in middle class homes, while middle class women work in offices.
In fact, the majority of women do some sort of paid work in addition to domestic labour. But their work is not valued and does not get recognition.
The result of this division of labour is that although women constitute half of the humanity, their role in public life, especially politics, is minimal in most societies. Earlier, only men were allowed to participate in public affairs, vote and contest for public offices. Gradually the gender issue was raised in politics.
Women in different parts of the world organised and agitated for equal rights. There were agitations in different countries for the extension of voting rights to women.
A poster from Bengal affirming women’s strength.
Sexual division of labour:
A system in which all work inside the home is either done by the women of the family, or organised by them through the domestic helpers.
Why not? If politics is about power, then surely male dominance in the household should be considered political.
Why are we discussing things like household work in this textbook on
Political Science?
Is this politics?
Reprint 2026-27
G e n d e r , R e l i g i o n a n d C a s t e
T h e s e a g i t a t i o n s d e m a n d e d enhancing the political and legal status of women and improving their educational and career opportunities.
More radical women’s movements aimed at equality in personal and family life as well. These movements are called feminist movements.
Political expression of gender division and political mobilisation
Discuss all these perceptions of an ideal woman that prevail in our society. Do you agree with any of these? If not, what is your image of an ideal woman?
Feminist: A woman or a man who believes in equal rights and opportunities for women and men.
on this question helped to improve women’s role in public life. We now find women working as scientists, d o c t o r s , e n g i n e e r s , l a w y e r s , managers and college and university teachers which were earlier not considered suitable for women. In some parts of the world, for example in Scandinavian countries, such as
Sweden, Norway and Finland, the
Reprint 2026-27
D e m o c r a t i c P o l i t i c s
Patriarchy: Literally, rule by father, this concept is used to refer to a system that values men more and gives them power over women.
Activities Men Women
Income generating work 6:00 2:40
Household and related work 0:30 5:00
Talking, Gossip 1:25 1:20
No work/ Leisure 3:40 3:50
Sleep, self-care, reading etc. 12:25 11:10
Daily time use (hours: minutes)
Source: Government of India, Time Use Survey, 1998-99.
+ A ‘time use survey’ was conducted in six states of our country. It shows that an average woman works every day for a little over seven and half hours while an average man works for six and a half hours. Yet the work done by men is more visible because most of their work leads to generation of income. Women also do a lot of direct income generating work, but the bulk of their work is household related. This work remains unpaid and invisible.
participation of women in public life is very high.
In our country, women still lag much behind men despite some improvement since Independence.
Ours is still a male-dominated, patriarchal society. Women face disadvantage, discrimination and oppression in various ways:
 The literacy rate among women is only 54 per cent compared with
76 per cent among men. Similarly, a smaller proportion of girl students go for higher studies. When we
You can conduct a similar time use survey in your own household. Observe all the adult male and female members of your family for one week. Every day note down the number of hours each of them spends on the following activities: income generating activity (working at the office or shop or factory or field, etc.), household related activity (cooking, cleaning, washing, fetching water, looking after children or elders, etc.), reading and recreation, talking/gossiping, self-care, taking rest or sleeping. If necessary make new categories. Add up the time taken on each activity for a week and calculate the daily average for each activity for each member. Do women work more in your family as well?
Reprint 2026-27
G e n d e r , R e l i g i o n a n d C a s t e
Mummy always says to outsiders:
“I don’t work. I am a housewife.”
But I see her working non-stop all the time. If what she does is not work, what else is work?
look at school results, girls perform as well as boys, if not better in some places. But they drop out because parents prefer to spend their resources for their boys’ education rather than spending equally on their sons and daughters.
 No wonder the proportion of women among the highly paid and valued jobs, is still very small. On an average, an Indian woman works one hour more than an average man every day. Yet much of her work is not paid and therefore, often not valued.
 The Equal Remuneration Act,
1976 provides that equal wages should be paid to equal work.
However in almost all areas of work, from sports and cinema, to factories and fields, women are paid less than men, even when both do exactly the same work.
 In many parts of India, parents prefer to have sons and find ways to have the girl child aborted before she is born. Such sex-selective abortion led to a decline in child sex ratio (number of girl children per thousand boys) in the country to merely 919. As the map shows, this
Can you identify your State on this map? What is the child sex ratio in it? How is it different from others with a different colour?
Identify the States which have child sex ratio below
Compare this map with the poster on the next page.
How do the two of them tell us about the same issue?
Source: Census Report of 2011
Reprint 2026-27
D e m o c r a t i c P o l i t i c s
© Oxfam GB ratio has fallen below 850 or even
800 in some States.
There are reports of various kinds of harassment, exploitation and violence against women. Urban areas have become particularly unsafe for women. They are not safe even within their own home from beating, harassment and other forms of domestic violence.
Women’s political representation
All this is well known. Yet issues related to women’s well being or otherwise are not given adequate attention. This has led many feminists and women’s movements to the conclusion that unless women control power, their problems will not get adequate attention. One way to ensure this is to have more women as elected representatives.
In India, the proportion of women in legislature has been very low. For example, the percentage of elected women members in Lok
Sabha has touched 14.36 per cent of its total strength for the first time in 2019. Their share in the state assemblies is less than 5 per cent.
In this respect, India is among the
Could you think of some reasons why women’s representation is so low in India? Do you think Americas and
Europe have achieved a satisfactory level of women’s representation?
Women in national parliaments in different regions of the world (in%)
Note: Figures are for the per cent of women in the directly elected houses of parliament as on 1 October
Source: http://archive.ipu.org/wmn-e/world.htm countries
Americas Europe Sub-
Saharan Africa
Pacific Arab
26.4 23.7
19.8 18.6
Reprint 2026-27
G e n d e r , R e l i g i o n a n d C a s t e
If casteism and communalism are bad, what makes feminism a good thing?
Why don’t we oppose all those who divide the society on any lines – caste, religion or bottom group of nations in the world (see the graph below). India is behind the averages for several developing countries of Africa and
Latin America. In the government, cabinets are largely all-male even when a woman becomes the Chief
Minister or the Prime Minister.
One way to solve this problem is to make it legally binding to have a fair proportion of women in the elected bodies. This is what the Panchayati
Raj has done in India. One-third of seats in local government bodies – in panchayats and municipalities – are now reserved for women. Now there are more than 10 lakh elected women representatives in rural and urban local bodies.
Women’s organizations and activists had been demanding a similar reservation of at least one- third of seats in Lok Sabha and
State Assemblies for women. A bill with this proposal was pending before the Parliament for many decades. In 2023, Nari shakti Vandan
Adhiniyam (Womens’ Reservation
Act, 2023) has been passed which will give 33 percent reservation of seats for women in Lok Sabha, State
Legislative Assemblies and also Delhi
Assembly.
Gender division is an example that some form of social division needs to be expressed in politics. This also shows that disadvantaged groups do benefit when social divisions become a political issue. Do you think that women could have made the gains we noted above if their unequal treatment was not raised in the political domain?
Reprint 2026-27
D e m o c r a t i c P o l i t i c s
Religion, communalism and politics
Let us now turn to a very different kind of social division, the division based on religious differences.
This division is not as universal as gender, but religious diversity is fairly widespread in the world today. Many countries including
India have in their population, followers of different religions. As we noticed in the case of Northern
Ireland, even when most of the people belong to the same religion, there can be serious differences about the way people practice that religion. Unlike gender differences, the religious differences are often expressed in the field of politics.
Consider the following:
 Gandhiji used to say that religion can never be separated from politics. What he meant by religion was not any particular religion like Hinduism or Islam but moral values that inform all religions. He believed that politics must be guided by ethics drawn from religion.
 Human rights groups in our country have demanded that the
Government should take special steps to prevent communal riots and protect religious minorities.
 Women’s movement has argued that family laws of all religions discriminate against women.
So they have demanded that government should change these laws to make them more equitable.
All these instances involve a relationship between religion
I am not religious.
Why should I bother about communalism and secularism?
and politics. But they do not seem very wrong or dangerous.
Ideas, ideals and values drawn from different religions can and perhaps should play a role in politics. People should be able to express in politics their needs, interests and demands as a member of a religious community. Those who hold political power should sometimes be able to regulate the practice of religion so as to prevent discrimination and oppression.
These political acts are not wrong as long as they treat every religion equally.
Communalism
The problem begins when religion is seen as the basis of the nation.
The example of Northern Ireland in Chapter 3 shows the dangers of such an approach to nationalism.
The problem becomes more acute when religion is expressed in politics in exclusive and partisan terms, when one religion and its followers are pitted against another. This happens when beliefs of one religion are presented as superior to those of other religions, when the demands of one religious group are formed in opposition to another and when state power is used to establish domination of one religious group over the rest. This manner of using religion in politics is communal politics.
Communal politics is based on the idea that religion is the principal basis of social community.
Communalism involves thinking
Reprint 2026-27
G e n d e r , R e l i g i o n a n d C a s t e along the following lines. The followers of a particular religion must belong to one community.
Their fundamental interests are the same. Any difference that they may have is irrelevant or trivial for community life. It also follows that people who follow different religions cannot belong to the same social community. If the followers of different religions have some commonalities these are superficial and immaterial, their interests are bound to be different and involve a conflict. In its extreme form, communalism leads to the belief that people belonging to different religions cannot live as equal citizens within one nation. Either, one of them has to dominate the rest or they have to form different nations.
This belief is fundamentally flawed. People of one religion do not have the same interests and aspirations in every context.
Everyone has several other roles, positions and identities. There are many voices inside every community. All these voices have a right to be heard.
