G e n d e r , R e l i g i o n a n d C a s t e is the caste that gets politicised. This takes several forms:
 Each caste group tries to become bigger by incorporating within it neighbouring castes or sub-castes which were earlier excluded from it.
 Various caste groups are required to enter into a coalition with other castes or communities and thus enter into a dialogue and negotiation.
 New kinds of caste groups have come up in the political arena like ‘backward’ and ‘forward’ caste groups.
Thus, caste plays different kinds of roles in politics. In some situations, expression of caste differences in politics gives many disadvantaged communities the space to demand their share of power. In this sense, caste politics has helped people from Dalits and
OBC castes to gain better access to decision making. Several political and non-political organisations have been demanding and agitating for an end to discrimination against particular castes, for more dignity and more access to land, resources and opportunities.
At the same time, exclusive attention to caste can produce negative results as well. As in the case of religion, politics based on caste identity alone is not very healthy in a democracy. It can divert attention from other pressing issues like poverty, development and corruption. In some cases, caste division leads to tensions, conflict and even violence.
Reprint 2026-27
D e m o c r a t i c P o l i t i c s
1. Mention different aspects of life in which women are discriminated or disadvantaged in India.
2. State different forms of communal politics with one example each.
3. State how caste inequalities are still continuing in India.
4. State two reasons to say that caste alone cannot determine election results in India.
5. What is the status of women’s representation in India’s legislative
6. Mention any two constitutional provisions that make India a secular
7. When we speak of gender divisions, we usually refer to:
(a) Biological difference between men and women (b) Unequal roles assigned by the society to men and women (c) Unequal child sex ratio (d) Absence of voting rights for women in democracies
8. In India seats are reserved for women in (a) Lok Sabha (b) State legislative assemblies (c) Cabinets (d) Panchayati Raj bodies
9. Consider the following statements on the meaning of communal politics. Communal politics is based on the belief that:
A. One religion is superior to that of others.
B. People belonging to different religions can live together happily as equal citizens.
C. Followers of a particular religion constitute one community.
D. State power cannot be used to establish the domination of one religious group over others.
Which of the statements are correct?
(a) A, B, C, and D (b) A, B, and D (c) A and C (d) B and D
10. Which among the following statements about India’s Constitution is wrong? It (a) prohibits discrimination on grounds of religion.
(b) gives official status to one religion.
(c) provides to all individuals freedom to profess any religion.
(d) ensures equality of citizens within religious communities.
11. Social divisions based on _________ are peculiar to India.
Exercises
Reprint 2026-27
G e n d e r , R e l i g i o n a n d C a s t e
Exercises
List I List II
1. A person who believes in equal rights and opportunities for women and men A. Communalist
2. A person who says that religion is the principal basis of community B. Feminist
3. A person who thinks that caste is the principal basis of community C. Secularist
4. A person who does not discriminate others on the basis of religious beliefs D. Castiest (a) B C A D (b) B A D C (c) D C A B (d) C A B D
12. Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below the Lists:
Reprint 2026-27
D e m o c r a t i c P o l i t i c s
Chapter 4
Overview
In this tour of democracy, we have come across political parties several times. In Class IX, we noticed the role of political parties in the rise of democracies, in the formation of constitutional designs, in electoral politics and in the making and working of governments. In this textbook, we have glanced at political parties as vehicles of federal sharing of political power and as negotiators of social divisions in the arena of democratic politics.
Before concluding this tour, let us take a close look at the nature and working of political parties, especially in our country. We begin by asking two common questions: Why do we need parties? How many parties are good for a democracy? In the light of these, we introduce the national and regional political parties in today’s India and then look at what is wrong with political parties and what can be done about it.
Political Parties
Reprint 2026-27
P o l i t i c a l P a r t i e s
Why do we need political parties?
Political parties are easily one of the most visible institutions in a democracy. For most ordinary citizens, democracy is equal to political parties. If you travel to remote parts of our country and speak to the less educated citizens, you could come across people who may not know anything about our
Constitution or about the nature of our government. But chances are that they would know something about our political parties. At the same time, this visibility does not mean popularity. Most people tend to be very critical of political parties.
They tend to blame parties for all that is wrong with our democracy and our political life. Parties have become identified with social and political divisions.
Therefore, it is natural to ask – do we need political parties at all? About hundred years ago, there were few countries of the world that had any political party. Now there are few that do not have parties. Why did political parties become so omnipresent in democracies all over the world? Let us first answer what political parties are and what they do, before we say why we need them.
A political party is a group of people who come together to contest elections and hold power in the government. They agree on some policies and programmes for the society with a view to promote the collective good. Since there can be different views on what is good for
So, you agree with me. Parties are partial, partisan and lead to partitions.
Parties do nothing but divide people.
That is their real function!
Election Commission has officially banned wall writing by parties during election times. Most political parties argue that was the cheapest way for their campaign. These election times used to create amazing graffiti on the walls. Here are some examples from Tamil Nadu.
© (1) M Govarthan (2) A Muralidharan (3) M Moorthy (4) T Singaravelou,
The Hindu
Reprint 2026-27
D e m o c r a t i c P o l i t i c s
Partisan: A person who is strongly committed to a party, group or faction. Partisanship is marked by a tendency to take a side and inability to take a balanced view on an issue.
© RK Laxman -
Brushing up the years all, parties try to persuade people why their policies are better than others. They seek to implement these policies by winning popular support through elections.
Thus, parties reflect fundamental political divisions in a society. Parties are about a part of the society and thus, involve partisanship. Thus, a party is known by which part it stands for, which policies it supports and whose interests it upholds. A political party has three components:
 the leaders,
 the active members and
 the followers
Functions
What does a political party do?
Basically, political parties fill political offices and exercise political power.
Parties do so by performing a series of functions:
1 Parties contest elections. In most democracies, elections are fought mainly among the candidates put up by political parties. Parties select their candidates in different ways.
In some countries, such as the USA, members and supporters of a party choose its candidates. Now more and more countries are following this method. In other countries like India, top party leaders choose candidates for contesting elections.
2 Parties put forward different policies and programmes and the voters choose from them. Each of us may have different opinions and views on what policies are suitable for the society. But no government can handle such a large variety of views. In a democracy, a large number of similar opinions have to be grouped together to provide a direction in which policies can be formulated by the governments.
This is what the parties do. A party reduces a vast multitude of opinions into a few basic positions which it
Reprint 2026-27
P o l i t i c a l P a r t i e s
Okay, granted that we can’t live without political parties.
But tell me on what grounds do people support a political party?
supports. A government is expected to base its policies on the line taken by the ruling party.
3 Parties play a decisive role in making laws for a country.
Formally, laws are debated and passed in the legislature. But since most of the members belong to a party, they go by the direction of the party leadership, irrespective of their personal opinions.
4 Parties form and run governments.
As we noted last year, the big policy decisions are taken by political executive that comes from the political parties. Parties recruit leaders, train them and then make them ministers to run the government in the way they want.
5 Those parties that lose in the elections play the role of opposition to the parties in power, by voicing different views and criticising government for its failures or wrong policies. Opposition parties also mobilise opposition to the government.
6 Parties shape public opinion.
They raise and highlight issues.
Parties have lakhs of members and activists spread all over the country.
Many of the pressure groups are the extensions of political parties among different sections of society. Parties sometimes also launch movements for the resolution of problems faced by people. Often opinions in the society crystallise on the lines parties take.
7 Parties provide people access to government machinery and welfare schemes implemented by governments. For an ordinary citizen it is easy to approach a local party leader than a government officer.
That is why, they feel close to parties even when they do not fully trust them. Parties have to be responsive to people’s needs and demands.
Otherwise people can reject those parties in the next elections.
Necessity
This list of functions in a sense answers the question asked above:
we need political parties because they perform all these functions.
But we still need to ask why modern democracies cannot exist without political parties. We can understand the necessity of political parties by imagining a situation without parties.
Every candidate in the elections will be independent. So no one will be able to make any promises to the people about any major policy changes. The government may be formed, but its utility will remain ever uncertain. Elected representatives will be accountable to their constituency for what they do in the locality. But no one will be responsible for how the country will be run.
We can also think about it by looking at the non-party based elections to the panchayat in many states. Although, the parties do not contest formally, it is generally noticed that the village gets split into more than one faction, each of which puts up a ‘panel’ of its candidates.
This is exactly what the party does.
That is the reason we find political parties in almost all countries of the world, whether these countries are big or small, old or new, developed or developing.
The rise of political parties is directly linked to the emergence of representative democracies.
Ruling Party: Political party that runs government.
Reprint 2026-27
D e m o c r a t i c P o l i t i c s
As we have seen, large societies need representative democracy.
As societies became large and complex, they also needed some agency to gather different views on various issues and to present these to the government. They needed some ways, to bring various representatives together so that a
Categorise these photographs by the functions of political parties they illustrate. Find one photograph or news clipping from your own area for each of the functions listed above.
responsible government could be formed. They needed a mechanism to support or restrain the government, make policies, justify or oppose them. Political parties fulfill these needs that every representative government has. We can say that parties are a necessary condition for a democracy.
How many parties should we have?
In a democracy any group of citizens is free to form a political party. In this formal sense, there are a large number of political parties in each country. More than 750 parties are registered with the Election
Commission of India. But not all these parties are serious contenders in the elections. Usually only a handful of parties are effectively in the race to win elections and form the government. So the question is:
how many major or effective parties are good for a democracy?
In some countries, only one party is allowed to control and run the government. These are called one-party systems. In Class IX, we noted that in China, only the
Communist Party is allowed to
1: Activists of BJP Mahila Morcha demonstrate against hike in prices of onions and LPG in
Visakhapatnam.
2: Minister distributes ` One lakh cheque to the families of hooch victims at their houses.
3: Activists of CPI (M), CPI, OGP and JD (S) take out a rally in Bhubaneswar to protest against
POSCO, the Korean steel company for being permitted by the State Government to export iron ore from Orissa to feed steel plants in China and Korea.
© (1) C V Subrahmanyan (2) K Gopinathan (3) A Chakrabarty,
The Hindu
Reprint 2026-27
P o l i t i c a l P a r t i e s rule. Although, legally speaking, people are free to form political parties, it does not happen because the electoral system does not permit free competition for power. We cannot consider one-party system as a good option because this is not a democratic option. Any democratic system must allow at least two parties to compete in elections and provide a fair chance for the competing parties to come to power.
In some countries, power usually changes between two main parties.
Several other parties may exist, contest elections and win a few seats in the national legislatures. But only the two main parties have a serious chance of winning majority of seats to form government. Such a party system is called two-party system.
The United States of America and the United Kingdom are examples of two-party system.
If several parties compete for power, and more than two parties have a reasonable chance of coming to power either on their own strength or in alliance with others, we call it a multiparty system. Thus in India, we have a multiparty system. In this system, the government is formed by various parties coming together in a coalition. When several parties in a multi-party system join hands for the purpose of contesting elections and winning power, it is called an alliance or a front. For example, in India there were three such major alliances in 2004 parliamentary elections– the
National Democratic Alliance, the
United Progressive Alliance and the
Left Front. The multiparty system often appears very messy and leads to political instability. At the same time, this system allows a variety of interests and opinions to enjoy political representation.
So, which of these is better?
Perhaps the best answer to this very common question is that this is not a very good question. Party system is not something any country can choose. It evolves over a long time, depending on the nature of society, its social and regional divisions, its history of politics and its system of elections. These cannot be changed very quickly. Each country develops a party system that is conditioned by its special circumstances. For example, if
India has evolved a multiparty system, it is because the social and geographical diversity in such a large country is not easily absorbed by two or even three parties. No system is ideal for all countries and all situations.
I wonder how politicians manage these coalitions. I can’t even remember the names of all the parties.
Let us apply what we have learnt about party systems to the various states within India. Here are three major types of party systems that exist at the State level. Can you find the names of at least two States for each of these types?
 Two-party system
 Multiparty system with two alliances
 Multiparty system
Reprint 2026-27
D e m o c r a t i c P o l i t i c s political parties participation It is often said that political parties are facing a crisis because they are very unpopular and the citizens are indifferent to political parties. The available evidence shows that this belief is only partly true for India. The evidence, based on a series of large sample surveys conducted over several decades, shows that:
 Political parties do not enjoy much trust among the people in
South Asia. The proportion of those who say their trust in political parties is ‘not much’ or ‘not at all’ is more than those who have
‘some’ or ‘great’ trust.
 The same is true of most other democracies as well. Political parties are one of the least trusted institutions all over the world.
 Yet the level of participation in the activities of political parties was fairly high. The proportion of those who said they were members of some political party was higher in India than many advanced countries like Canada, Japan, Spain and South Korea.
 Over the last three decades, the proportion of those who report to be members of political parties in India has gone up steadily.
 The proportion of those who say they feel ‘close to a political party’ has also gone up in India in this
Source: SDSA Team, State of Democracy in South Asia, Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2007
Reprint 2026-27
P o l i t i c a l P a r t i e s
National part
