D e m o c r a t i c P o l i t i c s any MLA or MP changes parties, he or she will lose the seat in the legislature. This new law has helped bring defection down. At the same time, this has made any dissent even more difficult. MPs and MLAs have to accept whatever the party leaders
 The Supreme Court passed an order to reduce the influence of money and criminals. Now, it is mandatory for every candidate who contests elections to file an affidavit giving details of his property and criminal cases pending against him.
The new system has made a lot of information available to the public.
But there is no system to check if the information given by the candidates is true. As yet we do not know if it has led to decline in the influence of the rich and the criminals.
 The Election Commission passed an order making it necessary for political parties to hold their organisational elections and file their income tax returns. The parties have started doing so but sometimes it is mere formality. It is not clear if this step has led to greater internal democracy in political parties.
Besides these, many suggestions are often made to reform political parties:
 A law should be made to regulate the internal affairs of political parties.
It should be made compulsory for political parties to maintain a register of its members, to follow its own constitution, to have an independent authority, to act as a judge in case of party disputes, to hold open elections to the highest posts.
 It should be made mandatory for political parties to give a minimum number of tickets, about one-third, to women candidates. Similarly, there should be a quota for women in the decision making bodies of the party.
 There should be state funding of elections. The government should give parties money to support their election expenses. This support could be given in kind: petrol, paper, telephone, etc. Or it could be given in cash on the basis of the votes secured by the party in the last election.
These suggestions have not yet been accepted by political parties. If and when these are accepted these could lead to some improvement.
But we must be very careful about legal solutions to political problems.
Over-regulation of political parties can be counter-productive. This would force all parties to find ways to cheat the law. Besides, political parties will not agree to pass a law that they do not like.
There are two other ways in which political parties can be reformed. One, people can put
Affidavit: A signed document submitted to an officer, where a person makes a sworn statement regarding her personal information.
Do you agree that this form of reforming political parties will be acceptable to them?
© Keshav -
The Hindu
Reprint 2026-27
P o l i t i c a l P a r t i e s
Exercises pressure on political parties. This can be done through petitions, publicity and agitations. Ordinary citizens, pressure groups and movements and the media can play an important role in this. If political parties feel that they would lose public support by not taking up reforms, they would become more serious about reforms.
Two, political parties can improve if those who want this, join political parties. The quality of democracy depends on the degree of public participation. It is difficult to reform politics if ordinary citizens do not take part in it and simply criticise it from the outside. The problem of bad politics can be solved by more and better politics. We shall return to this theme in the final chapter.
1. State the various functions political parties perform in a democracy.
2. What are the various challenges faced by political parties?
3. Suggest some reforms to strengthen parties so that they perform their functions well?
4. What is a political party?
5. What are the characteristics of a political party?
6. A group of people who come together to contest elections and hold power in the government is called a _____________________.
7. Match List I (organisations and struggles) with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below the lists:
8. Who among the following is the founder of the Bahujan Samaj
A. Kanshi Ram
B. Sahu Maharaj
C. B.R. Ambedkar
D. Jotiba Phule
9. What is the guiding philosophy of the Bharatiya Janata Party?
A. Bahujan Samaj
B. Revolutionary democracy
C. Integral humanism
D. Modernity (a) C A B D (b) C D A B (c) C A D B (d) D C A B
List I List II
1. Congress Party A. National Democratic Alliance
2. Bharatiya Janata Party B. State party
3. Communist Party of India (Marxist) C. United Progressive Alliance
4. Telugu Desam Party D. Left Front
Reprint 2026-27
D e m o c r a t i c P o l i t i c s
Exercises
10. Consider the following statements on parties.
A. Political parties do not enjoy much trust among the people.
B. Parties are often rocked by scandals involving top party leaders.
C. Parties are not necessary to run governments.
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) A, B, and C (b) A and B (c) B and C (d) A and C
11. Read the following passage and answer the questions given
Muhammad Yunus is a famous economist of Bangladesh.
He received several international honours for his efforts to promote economic and social development for the benefit of the poor. He and the Grameen Bank that he started jointly, received the Nobel Peace Prize for the year 2006. In February
2007, he decided to launch a political party and contest in the parliamentary elections. His objective was to foster proper leadership, good governance and build a new Bangladesh.
He felt that only a political party different from the traditional ones would bring about new political culture. His party would be democratic from the grassroots level.
The launching of the new party, called Nagarik Shakti (Citizens’ Power), has caused a stir among the Bangladeshis.
While many welcomed his decision, some did not like it. “Now
I think Bangladesh will have a chance to choose between good and bad and eventually have a good government,” said
Shahedul Islam, a government official. “That government, we hope, would not only keep itself away from corruption but also make fighting corruption and black money a top priority.”
But leaders of traditional political parties who dominated the country’s politics for decades were apprehensive. “There was no debate (over him) winning the Nobel, but politics is different – very challenging and often controversial,” said a senior leader of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party. Some others were highly critical. They asked why he was rushing into politics. “Is he being planted in politics by mentors from outside the country,” asked one political observer.
Do you think Yunus made a right decision to float a new political
Do you agree with the statements and fears expressed by various people? How do you want this new party organised to make it different from other parties? If you were the one to begin this political party, how would you defend it?
Reprint 2026-27
O u t c o m e s o f D e m o c r a c y
Chapter 5
Outcomes of
Democracy
Overview
As we begin to wind up our tour of democracy, it is time to move beyond our discussion of specific themes and ask a general set of questions: What does democracy do? Or, what outcomes can we reasonably expect of democracy? Also, does democracy fulfil these expectations in real life? We begin by thinking about how to assess the outcomes of democracy. After some clarity on how to think on this subject, we proceed to look at the expected and actual outcomes of democracy in various respects: quality of government, economic well-being, inequality, social differences and conflict and finally freedom and dignity.
Reprint 2026-27
D e m o c r a t i c P o l i t i c s
How do we assess democracy’s outcomes?
Do you remember how students in Madam Lyngdoh’s class argued about democracy? This was in
Chapter 2 of Class IX textbook.
It emerged from that conversation that democracy is a better form of government when compared with dictatorship or any other alternative.
We felt that democracy was better because it:
 Promotes equality among citizens;
 Enhances the dignity of the individual;
 Improves the quality of decision-making;
 Provides a method to resolve conflicts; and
 Allows room to correct mistakes.
Are these expectations realised under democracies? When we talk to people around us, most of them support democracy against other alternatives, such as rule by a monarch or military or religious leaders. But not so many of them would be satisfied with the democracy in practice. So we face a dilemma:
democracy is seen to be good in principle, but felt to be not so good in its practice. This dilemma invites us to think hard about the outcomes of democracy. Do we prefer democracy only for moral reasons? Or are there some prudential reasons to support democracy too?
Over a hundred countries of the world today claim and practice some kind of democratic politics:
they have formal constitutions, they hold elections, they have parties and they guarantee rights of citizens.
While these features are common to most of them, these democracies are very much different from each other in terms of their social situations, their economic achievements and their cultures. Clearly, what may be achieved or not achieved under each of these democracies will be very different. But is there something that we can expect from every democracy, just because it is democracy?
Our interest in and fascination for democracy often pushes us into taking a position that democracy can address all socio-economic and political problems. If some of our expectations are not met, we start blaming the idea of democracy. Or, we start doubting if we are living in a democracy. The first step towards thinking carefully about the outcomes of democracy is to recognise that democracy is just a form of government. It can only create conditions for achieving something.
The citizens have to take advantage of those conditions and achieve those goals. Let us examine some of the things we can reasonably expect from democracy and examine the record of democracy.
reach these conclusions in Madam
Lyngdoh’s class?
I loved that class because students were not being dictated any conclusions.
© RK Laxman -
Brushing up the years
Is democracy all about coping with multiple pressures and accommodating diverse demands?
Reprint 2026-27
O u t c o m e s o f D e m o c r a c y
Accountable, responsive and legitimate government
There are some things that democracy must provide. In a democracy, we are most concerned with ensuring that people will have the right to choose their rulers and people will have control over the rulers.
Whenever possible and necessary, citizens should be able to participate in decision making, that affects them all. Therefore, the most basic outcome of democracy should be that it produces a government that is accountable to the citizens, and responsive to the needs and expectations of the citizens.
Before we go into this question, we face another common question: Is the democratic government efficient?
Is it effective? Some people think that democracy produces less effective government. It is, of course, true that non-democratic rulers do not have to bother about deliberation in assemblies or worry about majorities and public opinion. So, they can be very quick and efficient in decision making and implementation. Democracy is based on the idea of deliberation and negotiation. So, some delay is bound to take place. Does that make democratic government inefficient?
Let us think in terms of costs.
Imagine a government that may take decisions very fast. But it may take decisions that are not accepted by the people and may therefore face problems. In contrast, the democratic government will take more time to follow procedures before arriving at a decision. But because it has followed procedures, its decisions may be both more acceptable to the people and more effective. So, the cost of time that democracy pays is perhaps worth it.
Now look at the other side – democracy ensures that decision making will be based on norms and procedures. So, a citizen who wants to know if a decision was taken through the correct procedures can find this out. She has the right and the means to examine the process of decision making. This is known as transparency. This factor is often missing from a non-democratic government.
Therefore, when we are trying to find out the outcomes of democracy, it is right to expect democracy to produce a government that follows procedures and is accountable to the people. We can also expect that the democratic government develops mechanisms for citizens to hold the government accountable and mechanisms for citizens to take part in decision making whenever they think fit.
If you wanted to measure democracies on the basis of this expected outcome, you would look for the following practices and institutions: regular, free and fair elections; open public debate on
© Mike Keefe
- Cagle Cartoons Inc.
Can you think of what and how the government knows about you and your family (for example ration cards and voter identity cards)?
What are the sources of information for you about the government?
Governmental Secrecy
Reprint 2026-27
D e m o c r a t i c P o l i t i c s
So, the best outcome of democracy is that it is a democracy! That is what we have discovered after all this mental gymnastics?
major policies and legislations;
and citizens’ right to information about the government and its functioning. The actual performance of democracies shows a mixed record on this. Democracies have had greater success in setting up regular and free elections and in setting up conditions for open public debate. But most democracies fall short of elections that provide a fair chance to everyone and in subjecting every decision to public debate. Democratic governments do not have a very good record when it comes to sharing information with citizens. All one can say in favour of democratic regimes is that they are much better than any n o n - d e m o c r a t i c r e g i m e i n these respects.
In substantive terms, it may be reasonable to expect from democracy a government that is attentive to the needs and demands of the people and is largely free of corruption.
The record of democracies is not impressive on these two counts.
Democracies often frustrate the needs of the people and often ignore the demands of a majority of its population. The routine tales of corruption are enough to convince us that democracy is not free of this evil.
At the same time, there is nothing to show that non-democracies are less corrupt or more sensitive to the people.
There is one respect in which democratic government is certainly better than its alternatives: demo- cratic government is legitimate government. It may be slow, less efficient, not always very responsive or clean. But a democratic government is people’s own government. That is why, there is an overwhelming support for the idea of democracy all over the world.
As the accompanying evidence from
South Asia shows, the support exists in countries with democratic regimes as well as countries without democratic regimes. People wish to be ruled by representatives elected by them. They also believe that democracy is suitable for their country. Democracy’s ability to generate its own support is itself an outcome that cannot be ignored.
Source: SDSA Team, State of Democracy in South Asia, Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2007
Democracy is preferred over dictatorship everywhere except
Pakistan
South Asia 28
Those who agree with one of the statements
Very few doubt the suitability of democracy for their own country
How suitable is democracy for your country?
Very suitable Suitable
South Asia 88
Bangladesh 93
Sri Lanka 92
India 92
Pakistan 84
Nepal 79
0 50 100
Overwhelming support for democracy
Those who agree with the rule of leaders elected by the people
Strongly agree Agree
South Asia 94
Sri Lanka 98
Bangladesh 96
India 95
Nepal 94
Pakistan 81
0 50 100 matter to me 25 21 28 49 18
Bangladesh India Nepal Pakistan Sri Lanka
Democracy is preferable 69 70 62 37 71
Sometimes dictatorship is better 6 9 10 14 11
Reprint 2026-27
O u t c o m e s o f D e m o c r a c y
Economic growth and development
If democracies are expected to produce good governments, then is it not fair to expect that they would also produce development?
Evidence shows that in practice, many democracies did not fulfil this expectation.
If you consider all democracies and all dictatorships for the fifty years between 1950 and 2000, dictatorships have slightly higher rate of economic growth. The inability of democracy to achieve higher economic development worries us.
But this alone cannot be reason to reject democracy. As you have already studied in economics, economic development depends on several factors: country’s population
The Rich Get Buff size, global situation, cooperation from other countries, economic priorities adopted by the country, etc. However, the difference in the rates of economic development between less developed countries with dictatorships and democracies is negligible. Overall, we cannot say that democracy is a guarantee of economic development. But we can expect democracy not to lag behind dictatorships in this respect.
When we find such significant difference in the rates of economic growth between countries under dictatorship and democracy, it is better to prefer democracy as it has several other positive outcomes.
© RJ Matson - Cagle Cartoons Inc.
Cartoon on this page and next three pages tell us about the disparities between the rich and poor. Should the gains of economic growth be evenly distributed?
How can the poor get a voice for a better share in a nation? What can the poor countries do to receive a greater share in the world’s wealth?
Reprint 2026-27
D e m o c r a t i c P o l i t i c s
Arguments about democracy tend to be very passionate. This is how it should be, for democracy appeals to some of our dee
