The Mathematics of Maybe:
Introduction to Probability
7.1 What is Probability?
Probability is a type of measurement, similar to how we measure quantities like length, area, or volume. However, instead of measuring physical quantities, probability is used to measure the likelihood of events. Specifically, it helps us express how confident or certain we are that a particular event will occur. For example, you may ask your friend:
• Is it going to rain today?
• Will our school win the inter-school hockey match tomorrow?
• Will I be chosen in the monthly lucky draw to perform at the school assembly?
[The names of all the students in school are written on slips of paper and one slip is randomly selected.]
These events are examples of random events. We know the possible outcomes (either it will rain today or it will not; our school team will either win, draw or lose the hockey match; one student will be chosen to perform at the school assembly), but we do not know in advance which one will definitely occur. That is, there is an element of chance or randomness involved every time such an event takes place.
Can we predict these outcomes with 100% certainty? One could respond to these questions with words such as impossible or certain, or using phrases such as less likely, more likely or equally likely. This decision is based on different kinds of evidence that have been gathered.
For example, one friend might say, “The sun is shining brightly, so it’s unlikely to rain today”, while another might observe, “It’s very hot, which makes me think it could rain later”. In both cases, they are predicting rainfall based on how they interpret the present weather conditions. This is the subjective probability given to the event of today’s rainfall.
Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part I 156
As you can see from the above example, probability deals with uncertainty or chance. One key feature of our increasingly complicated society is that we must deal with questions that have no fixed answer but rather one or more possibilities for the answer. Thus, understanding how to objectively estimate the probability of events is crucial in many aspects of life.
In this chapter, we will learn how we can measure probability more objectively, i.e., the ways of collecting evidence that can be used for an objective estimate of likelihood. But first, we must understand a few terms and ideas such as randomness and the probability scale.
7.1.1 What is Randomness?
Randomness refers to a situation or action (like the tossing of a coin or the rolling of a die) where you cannot predict exactly what will happen.
Although you may know all the possible outcomes, you cannot say which one will definitely occur. For example,
• Tossing a coin: You know it could be heads or tails, but you cannot be sure which one will come up in a single toss.
• Rolling a die: You know the possible outcomes are 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6, but you do not know which number will appear on a particular roll.
These observations (commonly called experiments or trials in probability) are called random because of their unpredictability. The lucky draw example mentioned earlier is an example of a random observation or experiment, as the outcome cannot be predicted in advance, and each student has an equal chance of being selected. All you can say is what could happen, not what will happen.
Random Observations: A random experiment is something you can repeat (like tossing a coin), where every time you do it, the result might be different and you cannot know the outcome in advance.
Think and Reflect
Such unpredictability can be useful sometimes! For example, in a cricket match, the fact that a coin is tossed to decide which team will bat first is considered to be a fair method. Can you explain why?
Probability is the area of mathematics that studies randomness and how likely a specific outcome is to happen in a random situation.
For example, when you toss a coin, the probability for heads is 1
The Mathematics of Maybe: Introduction to Probability 157 for tails is 1
2 , because each is equally likely. In a random experiment, every outcome has a chance to occur, but you can only determine the likelihood, not the exact result.
Have you wondered what makes an event like rain random?
An event like rain is considered random because it depends on many complex factors in the atmosphere (such as temperature, humidity, wind patterns, and pressure) and is so sensitive to these factors that it is impossible to predict it with total certainty. Thus, it is impossible to know with absolute certainty whether it will rain on a specific day.
Randomness in rain means that while the exact timing and location of rainfall cannot be predicted perfectly, we can estimate the likelihood or probability of rain in different locations based on patterns and probabilities derived from data.
Think and Reflect
Ask your friend to predict the outcome of a ` 1 coin you toss.
Do you see that your friend could guess heads or tails but could not know for certain? That’s randomness! All possible results are known, but each individual try is unpredictable.
7.1.2 The Probability Scale
Probability is measured on a scale from 0 to 1 to indicate the likelihood of the occurrence of an event. If the probability of your school winning the hockey match is 0.75, that means there is a 75% chance your school will win. This means that it is more likely than not that your school will win the match. If the probability of your school winning the hockey match is 0.5, that means there is a 50% chance your school will win. This means that it is equally likely that your school will win or lose the match. On the other hand, if the probability is 0, it would mean winning is impossible (for example, winning without playing), and if the probability is 1, it would mean your school is certain to win. The probabilities of most events fall somewhere strictly between 0 and 1, expressing how likely they are to happen.
Imagine a deck of six cards where the number of purple and green cards is unknown. The probability of picking a purple card from the deck (see Fig. 7.1) can range from impossible (if there are
Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part I 158 no purple cards) to certain (if all six are purple). As the number of purple cards increases, the likelihood of selecting a purple card moves smoothly along the probability scale from less likely, to even chance, to more likely. This scale helps us understand and compare how likely different events are, just like using a number line!
Fig. 7.1: Probabilities of picking a purple card from a deck on the probability scale
Here are a few examples of events and the probabilities of their occurrence. Look at the examples against the probability scale in
Fig. 7.1 to understand how probability is measured on a scale.
Event What it means
Getting a number greater than
6 on a die
Impossible: Dice only have numbers from 1 to 6.
Rolling a 3 on a standard die Less likely: But not impossible as one face of the die is 3.
Flipping a coin and getting heads Even chance: Heads or tails are equally
The Mathematics of Maybe: Introduction to Probability 159
Drawing any number from 2 to
10 from a deck of 52 cards
More likely: There are 36 cards in a deck of 52 cards with numbers from 2 to 10.
Choosing a red sweet from a bag of all red sweets
Certain: All the sweets are red.
ExErcisE sEt 7.1
1. Rank the following events on a scale from 0 (Impossible) to
1 (Certain). Label each event: Impossible, less likely, equally likely (even chance), more likely, certain. Give reasons why you gave each event its ranking.
(i) The next Monday will come after Sunday.
(ii) It will snow in Mumbai in July.
(iii) An elephant will walk through your classroom today.
(iv) You will greet at least one friend at school tomorrow.
7.2 Measuring Probability Objectively
There are two main ways of estimating the probability of an event objectively:
1. Using evidence from experience: This involves collecting data either by performing an experiment multiple times or by analysing statistical data from past observations. In both cases, the probability is estimated by calculating the relative frequency of the event based on the collected evidence. We call this experimental probability.
2. Using theoretical methods: This approach assumes that all possible outcomes are equally likely (when there is no reason to believe that any one outcome is more likely than another). The probability is then determined by reasoning about the number of favourable outcomes in relation to the total number of possible outcomes. We call this theoretical probability.
Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part I 160
7.2.1 Experimental Probability: Performing Observations or
Experiments
Another way of obtaining objective estimates for probabilities is to perform an experiment. In an experiment, the event is a result of the experiment and is called an outcome. The set of all possible outcomes in an experiment is called the sample space.
The sample space may be listed within brackets, separated by commas as shown below.
Example 1: Experiment: A coin is tossed
Possible Outcomes: Heads (H) or Tails (T) (See Fig. 7.2)
Sample Space: {H, T}
Experiment: A die is rolled
Possible Outcomes: The top side of the die shows 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 dots (See Fig. 7.3)
Sample Space: {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}
Fig. 7.2: Heads and tails of a coin Fig. 7.3: A 6-sided die
Experimental Probability = Number of times the event occurred
Total Number of trials
Example 2: Suppose you roll a die 50 times, and it lands on a 4 exactly 8 times.
Experimental probability of rolling a 4 is 8
50 0 16 16 = . % or .
We also say that the relative frequency of rolling a 4 is 8
50 0 16 = . .
Relative frequency helps you understand probability based on actual data, rather than theoretical predictions. It is especially useful in statistics and data analysis when you are working with observed outcomes.
The Mathematics of Maybe: Introduction to Probability 161
Did you know? The game of Snakes and Ladders originates in ancient
India. It evolved from a traditional dice game called Jñān-Chaupad̤, which was used as an educational tool.
Jñān-Chaupad̤ aimed to convey moral lessons, with each ladder symbolising a virtue and each snake representing a vice. Through gameplay, it illustrated the consequences of good and bad behaviour. Various versions of
Jñān-Chaupad̤ have been found in different parts of India.
Fig. 7.4: A Jain Jñān-Chaupad̤ game on cloth, National Museum (India, 19th century)
7.2.2 Theoretical Probability
Theoretical probability studies the likelihood of an event happening based on all possible outcomes being equally likely. It is what we expect to happen in an ideal, perfectly fair situation. In this scenario, no experiment or data is required. Theoretical probability is usually denoted as P (Event) or P (Outcome).
Theoretical Probability (P) = Number of favourable outcomes
Number of possible outcomes
Example 3: If you roll a standard 6-sided die, what is the theoretical probability of getting a 4?
Solution:
Number of favourable outcomes = 1 (only the number 4)
Number of all possible outcomes = 6 (the numbers 1 through 6)
P (rolling a 4) = 1
6 = 0.1666… ≈ 0.167 or 16.7%.
Example 4: A letter is picked at random from the word
‘PROBABILITY’. What is the probability of picking the letter B?
Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part I 162
Solution:
Number of favourable outcomes = 2 (there are 2 Bs in the word
PROBABILITY)
Number of all possible outcomes = 11 (The number of letters in the word PROBABILITY)
P (Picking the letter B) = 2
11 = 0.1818... ≈ 0.182 or 18.2%.
7.2.3 Analysing Statistical Data Using Probability
The way of collecting evidence through statistical data is used extensively in the world of business for marketing, forecasting sales, insurances and in science and social science research.
Example 5: Suppose you anonymously collect information regarding the favourite fruit of 50 students in your class. Let us assume that the results are: 20 students like mango, 15 students like apples, 10 students like bananas, and 5 students like grapes.
Let us play a game! Suppose we randomly pick one student from the class and try to guess their favourite fruit. What’s the probability that the student’s favourite fruit is mango? Statistical probability is based on collected data. So, a reasonable estimate that the student’s favourite fruit is mango is
Probability of mango as the favourite fruit
Number of students who like mango
Total number of students = =
50 0 4 . .
So, there is a 0.4 or 40% chance that a randomly chosen student in the class likes mango.
Now assume that you want to buy fruits for the entire school depending on the students’ favourite fruits. You would need to estimate the quantity of each type of fruit you need to purchase for the entire school of, say, 1500 students. It is usually impractical to collect data from all students or the entire population. The application of statistical probability in the real world is usually based on evidence collected from a sample. The population, i.e., the total number of students in the school, is 1500, and we collected evidence from a sample of 50 students from one class. An estimate of the probability that mango
The Mathematics of Maybe: Introduction to Probability 163 is the favourite fruit was calculated to be 0.4. So, that would mean that we need to buy approximately 600 (40% of 1500) mangoes, while the remaining would be other fruits — apples, bananas and grapes. If we want to be more confident about our estimate, we would choose a larger sample, for example, by asking 100 students, and make sure it is more representative, such as including students from different classes or grades. This process is called sampling in statistics.
LEARN MORE ABOUT SAMPLING
Want to learn more about sampling? What we have learned so far is just the beginning!
When collecting data through samples, there are other important things to think about — like how big your sample should be and how to make sure your sample truly represents the whole population. The size of your sample and making sure it’s fair and not biased can help your results be more accurate.
If you are interested and want to explore more about why sample size and representation matter in statistics, you can read more about it in print or digital resources.
Summarising, experimental probability is based on actual data collected from trials, not on assumptions. Theoretical probability relies on the assumption of equally likely outcomes (a perfectly fair situation) and does not use experimental data. Even in perfectly fair situations, experimental probability can differ from theoretical probability, especially when the number of trials is small. As the number of trials increases, the experimental probability tends to get closer to the theoretical probability — this is known as the Law of
Large Numbers.
Think and Reflect
If I have rolled a 4 on a die 8 times in succession, the probability of rolling a 4 again is still only ≈ 0.16 (assuming the die is fair). Probability does not tell you what will happen next but predicts what will happen in the long run.
Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part I 164
GAMBLER’S FALLACY
Many people think that if something random happens many times in a row (like flipping a coin and getting heads six times), then the opposite outcome (tails) is more likely to happen next. But actually, the coin does not keep track of what happened before. Every time you flip, the chance of heads or tails stays exactly the same — like starting afresh. The coin has no memory, so past flips do not change what happens next. This common misunderstanding is called Gambler’s Fallacy.
For example, imagine that you are flipping a fair coin. It comes up heads six times in a row. You might feel that on the next flip you are sure to get a tail, because tails haven’t come up for a while. However, the probability of getting tails on the next flip is still 50% or 1
2, exactly the same as before.
The coin has no memory of past flips!
Example 6: Let us say you are playing Snakes and Ladders, and you are rolling a fair 6-sided die to move.
You have just rolled the die three times in a row, and each time you got a 6.
Now, you think: ‘I have already rolled three 6s — there is no way I will get a 6 again on the next roll!’
This thinking is Gambler’s Fallacy — because each roll of the die is an independent event. The probability of rolling a 6 is always: 1
6 ≈ 0.166 or 16.6%.
It does not change based on what happened in previous turns.
Key Idea: In Snakes and Ladders, as in many games of chance, each roll of dice is independent. The Gambler’s Fallacy tricks people into believing there is a pattern, when in fact, such randomness has no
FAIR AND UNBIASED
W hen we speak of a coin, we assume it to be ‘fair’, i.e., it is symmetrical so that there is no reason for it to come down more often on one side than the other. We call this property of the coin as being ‘unbiased’. By the phrase ‘random toss’, we mean that the coin is allowed to fall freely without any bias or interference.
The Mathematics of Maybe: Introduction to Probability 165
ExErcisE sEt 7.2
1. A teacher mixes a large bag of sweets of different colours and randomly selects a sample of 30 sweets. She counts the number of sweets of each colour:
10 red sweets | 8 green sweets | 7 yellow sweets | 5 blue sweets (i) Calculate the probability that a randomly picked sweet from the sample is green.
(ii) If there are 600 sweets in total in the large bag, estimate how many are likely to be yellow, based on the sample results.
2. A survey is conducted at a school where a random sample of 40 students is asked about their favourite club. The responses are:
14 students: Science Club | 11 students: Arts Club |
9 students: Sports Club | 6 students: Debate Club
Assume there are 800 students in the whole school.
(i) What is the probability that a randomly chosen student from the sample prefers the Arts Club?
(i
