S S S S SECTORS ECTORS ECTORS ECTORS ECTORS OF OF OF OF OF THE THE THE THE THE IIIIINDIAN NDIAN NDIAN NDIAN NDIAN E E E E ECONOMY CONOMY CONOMY CONOMY CONOMY 21 21 21 21 21
Imagine what would happen if farmers refuse to sell sugarcane to a particular sugar mill. The mill will have to shut
Imagine what would happen to cotton cultivation if companies decide not to buy from the Indian market and import all cotton they need from other countries. Indian cotton cultivation will become less profitable and the farmers may even go bankrupt, if they cannot quickly switch to other crops. Cotton prices will fall.
Farmers buy many goods such as tractors, pumpsets, electricity, pesticides and fertilisers. Imagine what would happen if the price of fertilisers or pumpsets go up. Cost of cultivation of the farmers will rise and their profits will be reduced.
People working in industrial and service sectors need food. Imagine what would happen if there is a strike by transporters and lorries refuse to take vegetables, milk, etc. from rural areas.
Food will become scarce in urban areas whereas farmers will be unable to sell their products.
1. Complete the above table to show how sectors are dependent on each other.
2. Explain the difference between primary, secondary and tertiary sectors using examples other than those mentioned in the text.
3. Classify the following list of occupations under primary, secondary and tertiary sectors:
LET’S WORK THESE OUT
WHAT DOES THIS SHOW?
This is an example of the secondary or industrial sector being dependent on the primary.
• Tailor
• Basket weaver
• Flower cultivator
• Milk vendor
• Fishermen
• Priest
• Courier
• Workers in match factory
• Moneylender
• Gardener
• Potter
• Bee-keeper
• Astronaut
• Call centre employee
4. Students in a school are often classified into primary and secondary or junior and senior. What is the criterion that is used? Do you think this is a useful classification?
Discuss.
TABLE 2.1 EXAMPLES OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES
Economic activities, though, are grouped into three different categories, are highly interdependent. Let us look at some examples.
Reprint 2026-27
U U U U UNDERST NDERST NDERST NDERST NDERSTANDING ANDING ANDING ANDING ANDING E E E E ECONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC D D D D DEVEL EVEL EVEL EVEL EVELOPMENT OPMENT OPMENT OPMENT OPMENT 22 22 22 22 22
The various production activities in the primary, secondary and tertiary sectors produce a very large number of goods and services. Also, the three sectors have a large number of people working in them to produce these goods and services. The next step, therefore, is to see how much goods and services are produced and how many people work in each sector. In an economy there could be one or more sectors which are dominant in terms of total production and employment, while other sectors are relatively small in size.
How do we count the various goods and services and know the total production in each sector?
With so many thousands of goods and services produced, you might think this is an impossible task! Not only would the task be enormous, you might also wonder how we can add up cars and computers and nails and furniture. It won’t make sense!!!
You are right in thinking so. To get around this problem, economists suggest that the values of goods and services should be used rather than adding up the actual numbers. For example, if 10,000 kgs of wheat is sold at Rs 20 per kg, the value of wheat will be Rs 2,00,000. The value of 5000 coconuts at Rs
15 per coconut will be Rs 75,000. Similarly, the value of goods and services in the three sectors are calculated, and then added
Remember, there is one precaution one has to take. Not every good (or service) that is produced and sold needs to be counted. It makes sense only to include the final goods and services. Take, for instance, a farmer who sells wheat to a flour mill for Rs 20 per kg. The mill grinds the wheat and sells the flour to a biscuit company for Rs 25 per kg. The biscuit company uses the flour and things such as sugar and oil to make four packets of biscuits.
It sells biscuits in the market to the consumers for Rs 80 (Rs 20 per packet). Biscuits are the final goods, i.e., goods that reach the consumers.
Why are only ‘final goods and services’ counted? In contrast to final goods, goods such as wheat and the wheat flour in this example are intermediate goods. Intermediate goods are used up in producing final goods and services. The value of final goods already includes the value of all the intermediate goods that are used in making the final good. Hence, the value of Rs
80 for the biscuits (final good) already includes the value of flour (Rs 25). Similarly, the value of all other intermediate goods would have been included. To count the value of the flour and wheat separately is therefore not correct because then we would be counting the value of the same things a number of times.
First as wheat, then as flour and finally as biscuits.
COMPARING THE THREE SECTORS
...BUT I SHOULD BE PAID THE
FULL VALUE OF THE WHEAT
THAT I PRODUCE !
Reprint 2026-27
S S S S SECTORS ECTORS ECTORS ECTORS ECTORS OF OF OF OF OF THE THE THE THE THE IIIIINDIAN NDIAN NDIAN NDIAN NDIAN E E E E ECONOMY CONOMY CONOMY CONOMY CONOMY 23 23 23 23 23
The value of final goods and services The value of final goods and services The value of final goods and services The value of final goods and services The value of final goods and services produced in each sector during a produced in each sector during a produced in each sector during a produced in each sector during a produced in each sector during a particular year provides the total particular year provides the total particular year provides the total particular year provides the total particular year provides the total production of the sector for that year. production of the sector for that year. production of the sector for that year. production of the sector for that year. production of the sector for that year.
And the sum of production in the different sectors gives what is called the Gross Gross Gross Gross Gross
Domestic Pr Domestic Pr Domestic Pr Domestic Pr Domestic Product (GDP) oduct (GDP) oduct (GDP) oduct (GDP) oduct (GDP) of a country. It is the value of all final goods and services produced within a country within a country within a country within a country within a country during a particular year. GDP shows how big the economy is.
In India, the mammoth task of measuring GDP is undertaken by a central government ministry. This Ministry, with the help of various government departments of all the Indian states and union territories, collects information relating to total volume of goods and services and their prices and then estimates the GDP.
Recently Indian Government began to bring out the contribution of three sectors towards Gross Value Added (GVA) in place of the contribution of three sectors towards
Gross Domestic Product to be at par with global practices. The GVA measures the contribution of three sectors of an economy after adjusting for taxes and subsidies. You will learn more about the
GVA and the difference between GDP and GVA in higher classes. Here we will only understand how goods and services produced in these three sectors—primary, secondary and tertiary sectors have changed.
Historical Change in Sectors
Generally, it has been noted from the histories of many, now developed, countries that at initial stages of development, primary sector was the most important sector of economic activity.
As the methods of farming changed and agriculture sector began to prosper, it produced much more food than before.
Many people could now take up other activities. There were increasing number of craft-persons and traders. Buying and selling activities increased many times.
Besides, there were also transporters, administrators, army etc. However, at this stage, most of the goods produced were natural products from the primary sector and most people were also employed in this sector.
Over a long time (more than hundred years), and especially because new methods of manufacturing were introduced, factories came up and started expanding.
Those people who had earlier worked on farms now began to work in factories in large numbers. They were forced to do so as you read in history chapters. People began to use many more goods that were produced in factories at cheap rates.
Secondary sector gradually became the most important in total production and employment. Hence, over time, a shift had taken place. This means that the importance of the sectors had changed.
In the past 100 years, there has been a further shift from secondary to tertiary sector in developed countries. The service sector has become the most important in terms of total production. Most of the working people are also employed in the service sector. This is the general pattern observed in developed countries.
What is the total production and employment in the three sectors in India?
Over the years have there been changes similar to the pattern observed for the developed countries? We shall see in the next section.
1. What does the history of developed countries indicate about the shifts that have taken place between sectors?
2. Correct and arrange the important aspects for calculating
GDP from this Jumble.
To count goods and services we add the numbers that are produced. We count all those that were produced in the last five years. Since we shouldn’t leave out anything we add up all these goods and services.
3. Discuss with your teacher how you could calculate the total value of a good or service by using the method of value added at each stage.
LET’S WORK THESE OUT
Reprint 2026-27
U U U U UNDERST NDERST NDERST NDERST NDERSTANDING ANDING ANDING ANDING ANDING E E E E ECONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC D D D D DEVEL EVEL EVEL EVEL EVELOPMENT OPMENT OPMENT OPMENT OPMENT 24 24 24 24 24
Graph 1 shows the production of goods and services in the three sectors.
This is shown for two years,
1977–78 and 2017–18. We have used the data for these two years because the data are comparable and authentic. You can see how the total production has grown over the forty years.
PRIMARY, SECONDARY AND TERTIARY
SECTORS IN INDIA
Answer the following questions by looking at the graph:
1. Which was the largest producing sector in 1977–78?
2. Which is the largest producing sector in 2017–18?
3. Can you say which sector has grown the most over forty years?
4. What was the GDP of India in
2017–18?
LET’S WORK THESE
Rising Importance of the
Tertiary Sector in Production
Over the forty years between 1977–78 and 2017–18, while production in all the three sectors has increased, it has increased the most in the tertiary sector.
As a result, in the year 2017–18, the tertiary sector has emerged as the largest producing sector in India replacing the primary sector.
Why is the tertiary sector becoming so important in India? There could be several reasons.
First, in any country several services such as hospitals, educational institutions, post and telegraph services, police stations, courts, village administrative offices, municipal corporations, defence, transport, banks, insurance companies, etc. are required. These can be considered as basic services.
In a developing country the government has to take responsibility for the provision of these services.
Second, the development of agriculture and industry leads to the development of services such as
Graph 1: GVA by Primary, Secondary and
Tertiary Sectors
What does the comparison between
1977–78 and 2017–18 show?
What conclusions can we draw from the comparison?
Let’s find out.
1977-78 2017-18
Rs. in crores
Reprint 2026-27
S S S S SECTORS ECTORS ECTORS ECTORS ECTORS OF OF OF OF OF THE THE THE THE THE IIIIINDIAN NDIAN NDIAN NDIAN NDIAN E E E E ECONOMY CONOMY CONOMY CONOMY CONOMY 25 25 25 25 25 transport, trade, storage and the like, as we have already seen. Greater the development of the primary and secondary sectors, more would be the demand for such services.
Third, as income levels rise, certain sections of people start demanding many more services like eating out, tourism, shopping, private hospitals, private schools, professional training etc. You can see this change quite sharply in cities, especially in big cities.
Fourth, over the past decade or so, certain new services such as those based on information and communication technology have become important and essential. The production of these services has been rising rapidly. In Chapter 4, we shall see examples of these new services and the reasons for their expansion.
However, you must remember that not all of the service sector is growing equally well. Service sector in India employs many different kinds of people. At one end there are a limited number of services that employ highly skilled and educated workers. At the other end, there are a very large number of workers engaged in services such as small shopkeepers, repair persons, transport persons, etc. These people barely manage to earn a living and yet they perform these services because no alternative opportunities for work are available to them. Hence, only a part of this sector is growing in importance. You shall read more about this in the next section.
Where are most of the people employed?
Graph 2 presents percentage share of the three sectors in GVA. Now you can directly see the changing importance of the sectors over the forty years.
Graph 2: Share of Sectors in GVA
A remarkable fact about India is that while there has been a change in the share of the three sectors in
GVA, a similar shift has not taken place in employment. Graph 3 shows the share of employment in the three sectors in 1977-78 and
2017-18. T h e p r i m a r y s e c t o r c o n t i n u e s t o b e t h e l a r g e s t employer even now.
Why didn’t a similar shift out of primary sector happen in case of employment? It is because not enough jobs were created in the secondary and tertiary sectors. Even
Graph 3 : Share of Sectors in Employment (%)
1977-78 2017-18
Reprint 2026-27
U U U U UNDERST NDERST NDERST NDERST NDERSTANDING ANDING ANDING ANDING ANDING E E E E ECONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC D D D D DEVEL EVEL EVEL EVEL EVELOPMENT OPMENT OPMENT OPMENT OPMENT 26 26 26 26 26 though industrial output or the production of goods went up by more than nine times during the period, employment in the industry went up by around three times. The same applies to the tertiary sector as well. While production in the service sector rose by 14 times, employment in the service sector rose around five times.
As a result, more than half of the workers in the country are working in the primary sector, mainly in agriculture, producing only about one sixth of the GVA. In contrast to this, the secondary and tertiary sectors produce the rest of the produce whereas they employ less about half the people. Does this mean that the workers in agriculture are not producing as much as they could?
What it means is that there are more people in agriculture than is necessary. So, even if you move a few people out, production will not be affected. In other words, workers in the agricultural sector are underemployed.
For instance, take the case of a small farmer, Laxmi, owning about two hectares of unirrigated land d e p e n d e n t o n l y o n r a i n a n d growing crops, like jowar and arhar.
All five members of her family work in the plot throughout the year.
Why? They have nowhere else to go for work. You will see that everyone is working, none remains idle, but in actual fact, their labour effort gets divided. Each one is doing some work but no one is fully employed. This is the situation of underemployment, where people are apparently working but all of them are made to work less than their potential. This kind of underemployment is hidden in contrast to someone who does not have a job and is clearly visible as unemployed. Hence, it is also called disguised unemployment.
Now, supposing a landlord,
Sukhram, comes and hires one or two members of the family to work on his land. Laxmi’s family is now able to earn some extra income through wages. Since you do not need five people to look after that small plot, two people moving out does not affect production on their farm. In the above example, two people may move to work in a factory. Once again the earnings of the family would increase and they would also continue to produce as much from their land.
There are lakhs of farmers like
Laxmi in India. This means that even if we remove a lot of people from agricultural sector and provide them with proper work elsewhere, agricultural production will not suffer. The incomes of the people who take up other work would increase the total family income.
This underemployment can also h a p p e n i n o t h e r s e c t o r s . F o r example there are thousands of casual workers in the service sector in urban areas who search for daily employment. They are employed as painters, plumbers, repair persons and others doing odd jobs. Many of them don’t find work everyday. Similarly, we see other people of the service sector on the street pushing a cart or selling something where they may spend the whole day but earn very little. They are doing this work because they do not have better opportunities.
Reprint 2026-27
S S S S SECTORS ECTORS ECTORS ECTORS ECTORS OF OF OF OF OF THE THE THE THE THE IIIIINDIAN NDIAN NDIAN NDIAN NDIAN E E E E ECONOMY CONOMY CONOMY CONOMY CONOMY 27 27 27 27 27
How to Create More
Employment?
From the above discussion, we can see that there continues to be considerable underemployment in agriculture.
There are also people who are not employed at all. In what ways can one increase employment for people? Let us look at some of them.
Take the case of Laxmi with her two-hectare plot of unirrigated land.
The government can spend some money or banks can provide a loan, to construct a well for her family to irrigate the land. Laxmi w
