U U U U UNDERST NDERST NDERST NDERST NDERSTANDING ANDING ANDING ANDING ANDING E E E E ECONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC D D D D DEVEL EVEL EVEL EVEL EVELOPMENT OPMENT OPMENT OPMENT OPMENT 36 36 36 36 36
3. Match the following:
Problems faced by farming sector Some possible measures
1. Unirrigated land (a) Setting up agro-based mills
2. Low prices for crops (b) Cooperative marketing societies
3. Debt burden (c) Procurement of food grains by government
4. No job in the off season (d) Construction of canals by the government
5. Compelled to sell their grains to (e) Banks to provide credit with low interest the local traders soon after harvest
4. Find the odd one out and say why.
(i) Tourist guide, dhobi, tailor, potter (ii) Teacher, doctor, vegetable vendor, lawyer (iii) Postman, cobbler, soldier, police constable (iv) MTNL, Indian Railways, Air India, Jet Airways, All India Radio
5. A research scholar looked at the working people in the city of Surat and found the following.
Percentage of working people
Nature of employment
Organised
Place of work
In offices and factories registered with the government
Own shops, office, clinics in marketplaces with formal license
People working on the street, construction workers, domestic
Working in small workshops usually not registered with the government
Complete the table. What is the percentage of workers in the unorganised sector in this city?
6. Do you think the classification of economic activities into primary, secondary and tertiary is useful? Explain how.
7. For each of the sectors that we came across in this chapter why should one focus on employment and GVA? Could there be other issues which should be examined? Discuss.
8. Make a long list of all kinds of work that you find adults around you doing for a living. In what way can you classify them? Explain your choice.
9. How is the tertiary sector different from other sectors? Illustrate with a few examples.
10. What do you understand by disguised unemployment? Explain with an example each from the urban and rural areas.
11. Distinguish between open unemployment and disguised unemployment.
12. “Tertiary sector is not playing any significant role in the development of Indian economy.” Do you agree? Give reasons in support of your answer.
U U U U UNDERST NDERST NDERST NDERST NDERSTANDING ANDING ANDING ANDING ANDING E E E E ECONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC D D D D DEVEL EVEL EVEL EVEL EVELOPMENT OPMENT OPMENT OPMENT OPMENT 36 36 36 36 36
Reprint 2026-27
S S S S SECTORS ECTORS ECTORS ECTORS ECTORS OF OF OF OF OF THE THE THE THE THE IIIIINDIAN NDIAN NDIAN NDIAN NDIAN E E E E ECONOMY CONOMY CONOMY CONOMY CONOMY 37 37 37 37 37 S S S S SECTORS ECTORS ECTORS ECTORS ECTORS OF OF OF OF OF THE THE THE THE THE IIIIINDIAN NDIAN NDIAN NDIAN NDIAN E E E E ECONOMY CONOMY CONOMY CONOMY CONOMY 37 37 37 37 37
13. Service sector in India employs two different kinds of people. Who are these?
14. Workers are exploited in the unorganised sector. Do you agree with this view?
Give reasons in support of your answer.
15. How are the activities in the economy classified on the basis of employment conditions?
16. Compare the employment conditions prevailing in the organised and unorganised sectors.
17. Explain the objective of implementing the MGNREGA 2005 or
Viksit Bharat-G RAM G 2025.
18. Using examples from your area compare and contrast that activities and functions of private and public sectors.
19. Discuss and fill the following table giving one example each from your area.
Well managed organisation Badly managed organisation
Public sector
Private Sector
20. Give a few examples of public sector activities and explain why the government has taken them up.
21. Explain how public sector contributes to the economic development of a nation.
22. The workers in the unorganised sector need protection on the following issues :
wages, safety and health. Explain with examples.
23. A study in Ahmedabad found that out of 15,00,000 workers in the city, 11,00,000 worked in the unorganised sector. The total income of the city in this year (1997-1998) was Rs 60,000 million. Out of this Rs 32,000 million was generated in the organised sector. Present this data as a table. What kind of ways should be thought of for generating more employment in the city?
24. The following table gives the GVA in Rupees (Crores) by the three sectors:
Year Primary Secondary Tertiary
2001-02 13,23,000 10,40,000 19,31,000
2021-22 24,79,400 40,73,000 73,25,000 (i) Calculate the share of the three sectors in GDP for 2000 and 2013.
(ii) Show the data as a bar diagram similar to Graph 2 in the chapter.
(iii) What conclusions can we draw from the bar graph?
Reprint 2026-27
NOTES FOR THE TEACHER
CHAPTER 3 : MONEY AND CREDIT
Money is a fascinating subject and full of curiosities. It is important to capture this element for the students. The history of money and how various forms were used at different times is an interesting story. At this stage the purpose is to allow students to realise the social situation in which these forms were used. Modern forms of money are linked to the banking system. This is the central idea of the first part of the chapter.
The present situation in India, where newer forms of money are slowly spreading with computerisation of the banking system, offers many opportunities to students to explore on their own. We need not get into a formal discussion of the ‘functions of money’ but let it come up as questions.
As you would see in the chapter, the stock of money consists of currency held by the public and the demand deposits that they hold with the banks. This is the money that people can use as they wish and the government has to ensure that the system works smoothy.
What would happen when the government declares that some of the currency notes used by people would be made invalid and would be replaced by new currency? In India, during
November 2016, currency notes in the denomination of Rs. 500 and Rs. 1,000 were declared invalid. People were asked to surrender these notes to the bank by a specific period and receive new Rs. 500, Rs. 2,000 or other currency notes. This is known as
‘demonetisation’. Since then, people were also encouraged to use their bank deposits rather than cash for transactions. Hence, digital transactions started by using bank-to-bank transfer through the internet or mobile phones, cheques, ATM cards, credit cards,
Point of Sale (POS) swipe machines, and
QR codes through UPI system at shops. This is promoted to reduce the requirement of cash for transactions and also control corruption.
Students could be asked to debate on the process and the impact of demonetisation and digitalisation. They can be guided to make a collage of the major areas where people use digital and cash transactions which are legitimate and legal. They can also discuss the transactions which are legal and why. It is also important to intimate students that different types of plastic cards are used in place of cash transactions but not all of them money per se.
Credit is a crucial element in economic life and it is, therefore, important to first understand this in a conceptual manner.
What are the aspects that one looks at in any credit arrangement and how this affects people is the main focus of the second part of the chapter. The world around us offers a tremendous variety of such arrangements and it would be ideal to explain these aspects of credit from situations that are familiar to your students. The other crucial issue of credit is its availability to all, especially the poor, and on reasonable terms. We need to emphasise that this is a right of the people and without which a large section of them would be kept out of the development process. There are many innovative interventions, such as that of
Grameen Bank, of which students may be made familiar with but it is important to realise that we don’t have answers to all questions. We need to find new ways and this is one of the social challenges that developing countries face.
Sources for Information
The data on formal and informal sector credit used in this chapter is drawn from the survey on rural debt by the National Sample
Survey Organisation (All India Debt and
Investment Survey, 77th Round 2019, conducted by NSSO) now known as National
Statistical Office (NSO). The information and data on Grameen Bank is taken from newspaper reports and websites. In order to get the details of bank-related statistics or a particular detail of a bank, you can log on to the websites of the Reserve Bank of
India (www.rbi.org) and the concerned banks. Data on self-help groups is provided on the website of the National Bank for
Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) (www.nabard.org).
38 38 38 38 38 U U U U UNDERST NDERST NDERST NDERST NDERSTANDING ANDING ANDING ANDING ANDING E E E E ECONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC D D D D DEVEL EVEL EVEL EVEL EVELOPMENT OPMENT OPMENT OPMENT OPMENT
Reprint 2026-27
M M M M MONEY ONEY ONEY ONEY ONEY AND AND AND AND AND C C C C CREDIT REDIT REDIT REDIT REDIT 39 39 39 39 39
The use of money spans a very large part of our everyday life. Look around you and you would easily be able to identify several transactions involving money in any single day. Can you make a list of these? In many of these transactions, goods are being bought and sold with the use of money. In some of these transactions, services are being exchanged with money. For some, there might not be any actual transfer of money taking place now but a promise to pay money later.
Have you ever wondered why transactions are made in money? The reason is simple.
A person holding money can easily exchange it for any commodity or service that he or she might want.
Thus everyone prefers to receive payments in money and then exchange the money for things that they want. Take the case of a shoe manufacturer. He wants to sell shoes in the market and buy wheat. The shoe manufacturer will first exchange shoes that he has produced for money, and then exchange the money for wheat. Imagine how much more difficult it would be if the shoe manufacturer had to directly exchange shoes for wheat without the use of money. He would have to look for a wheat growing farmer who not only wants to sell wheat but also wants to buy the shoes in exchange.
That is, both parties have to agree to sell and buy each others commodities.
This is known as double coincidence of wants. What a person desires to sell is exactly what the other wishes to buy. In a barter system where goods are directly exchanged without the use of money, double coincidence of wants is an essential feature.
In contrast, in an economy where money is in use, money by providing the crucial intermediate step eliminates the need for double coincidence of wants. It is no longer necessary for the shoe manufacturer to look for a farmer who will buy his shoes and at the same time sell him
MONEY MONEY MONEY MONEY MONEYAND AND AND AND AND
CREDIT CREDIT CREDIT CREDIT CREDIT
CHAPTER 3
MONEY AS A MEDIUM OF EXCHANGE
I’LL GIVE
YOU SHOES
FOR YOUR
I DON’T NEED
SHOES. I NEED
CLOTHES.
I WANT SHOES.
BUT I DON’T HAVE
Reprint 2026-27
40 40 40 40 40 U U U U UNDERST NDERST NDERST NDERST NDERSTANDING ANDING ANDING ANDING ANDING E E E E ECONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC D D D D DEVEL EVEL EVEL EVEL EVELOPMENT OPMENT OPMENT OPMENT OPMENT
We have seen that money is something that can act as a medium of exchange in transactions. Before the introduction of coins, a variety of objects was used as money. For example, since the very early ages,
Indians used grains and cattle as money. Thereafter came the use of metallic coins — gold, silver, copper coins — a phase which continued well into the last century.
Currency
Modern forms of money include currency — paper notes and coins.
Unlike the things that were used as money earlier, modern currency is not made of precious metal such as gold, silver and copper. And unlike grain and cattle, they are neither of everyday use. The modern currency is without any use of its own.
Then, why is it accepted as a medium of exchange? It is accepted as a medium of exchange because the currency is authorised by the government of the country.
In India, the Reserve Bank of India issues currency notes on behalf of the central government. As per Indian law, no other individual or organisation is allowed to issue currency. Moreover, the law legalises the use of rupee as a medium of payment that cannot be refused in settling transactions in India. No individual in India can legally refuse a payment made in rupees. Hence, the rupee is widely accepted as a medium of exchange.
Deposits with Banks
The other form in which people hold money is as deposits with banks. At a point of time, people need only some currency for their day-to-day needs.
For instance, workers who receive their salaries at the end of each month have extra cash at the beginning of the month. What do people do with this extra cash? They deposit it with the banks by opening a bank account in their name. Banks accept the deposits and also pay an amount as interest on the deposits. In this way people’s money is safe with the banks and it earns an amount as interest. People also have the provision to withdraw the money as and when they require. Since the deposits in the bank accounts can be withdrawn on demand, these deposits are called demand deposits.
1. How does the use of money make it easier to exchange things?
2. Can you think of some examples of goods / services being exchanged or wages being paid through barter?
LET’S WORK THESE OUT
MODERN FORMS OF MONEY
Early punch- marked coins (may be 2500 years old)
wheat. All he has to do is find a buyer for his shoes. Once he has exchanged his shoes for money, he can purchase wheat or any other commodity in the market. Since money acts as an intermediate in the exchange process, it is called a medium of exchange.
Modern coin
Reprint 2026-27
M M M M MONEY ONEY ONEY ONEY ONEY AND AND AND AND AND C C C C CREDIT REDIT REDIT REDIT REDIT 41 41 41 41 41
Cheque Payments Cheque Payments Cheque Payments Cheque Payments Cheque Payments
A shoe manufacturer, M. Salim has to make a payment to the leather supplier and writes a cheque for a specific amount. This means that the shoe manufacturer instructs his bank to pay this amount to the leather supplier. The leather supplier takes this cheque, and deposits it in his own account in the bank. The money is transferred from one bank account to another bank account in a couple of days. The transaction is complete without any payment of cash.
Thus we see that demand deposits share the essential features of money.
The facility of cheques against demand deposits makes it possible to directly settle payments without the use of cash.
Since demand deposits are accepted widely as a means of payment, along with currency, they constitute money in the modern economy.
You must remember the role that the banks play here. But for the banks, there would be no demand deposits and no payments by cheques against these deposits. The modern forms of money — currency and deposits — are closely linked to the working of the modern banking
Account number
Coding used by banks Cheque number
Demand deposits offer another interesting facility. It is this facility w h i c h l e n d s i t t h e e s s e n t i a l characteristics of money (that of a medium of exchange). You would have heard of payments being made by cheques instead of cash.
For payment through cheque, the payer who has an account with the bank, makes out a cheque for a specific amount. A cheque is a paper instructing the bank to pay a s p e c i f i c a m o u n t f r o m t h e person’s account to the person in whose name the cheque has been
Bank branch
LET US TRY AND UNDERSTAND
HOW CHEQUE PAYMENTS ARE
MADE AND REALISED WITH
AN EXAMPLE.
Reprint 2026-27
42 42 42 42 42 U U U U UNDERST NDERST NDERST NDERST NDERSTANDING ANDING ANDING ANDING ANDING E E E E ECONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC D D D D DEVEL EVEL EVEL EVEL EVELOPMENT OPMENT OPMENT OPMENT OPMENT
L et us take the story of banks further. What do the banks do with the deposits which they accept from the public? There is an interesting mechanism at work here. Banks keep only a small proportion of their deposits as cash with themselves. For example, banks in India these days hold about 5 per cent of their deposits as cash. This is kept as provision to pay the depositors who might come to withdraw money from the bank on any given day. Since, on any particular day, only some of its many depositors come to withdraw cash, the bank is able to manage with this cash.
Banks use the major portion of the deposits to extend loans. There is a huge demand for loans for various economic activities. We shall read more about this in the following sections.
Banks make use of the deposits to meet the loan requirements of the people. In this way, banks mediate between those who have surplus funds (the depositors) and those who are in need of these funds (the borrowers). Banks charge a higher interest rate on loans than what they offer on deposits. The difference between what is charged from borrowers and what is paid to depositors is their main source of
LOAN ACTIVITIES OF BANKS
People make deposits
People make withdrawals and get interest
People take
People repay loans with interest
DEPOSITORS BORROWERS
1. M. Salim wants to withdraw Rs 20,000 in cash for making payments. How would he write a cheque to withdraw money?
2. Tick the correct answer.
After the transaction between Salim and Prem, (i) Salim’s balance in his bank account increases, and Prem’s balance increases.
(ii) Salim’s balance in his bank account decreases and Prem’s balance increases.
(iii) Salim’s balance in his bank account increases and Prem’s balance decreases.
3. Why are demand deposits considered as money?
LET’S WORK THESE OUT
What do you think would happen if all the depositors went to ask for their money at the same time?
Reprint 20
