1 What do you understand by globalisation? Explain in your own words.
2. What were the reasons for putting barriers to foreign trade and foreign investment by the Indian government? Why did it wish to remove these barriers?
3. How would flexibility in labour laws help companies?
4. What are the various ways in which MNCs set up, control or produce in other countries?
5. Why do developed countries want developing countries to liberalise their trade and investment? What do you think should the developing countries demand in return?
6. “The impact of globalisation has not been uniform.” Explain this statement.
7. How has liberalisation of trade and investment policies helped the globalisation process?
8. How does foreign trade lead to integration of markets across countries? Explain with an example other than those given here.
9. Globalisation will continue in the future. Can you imagine what the world would be like twenty years from now? Give reasons for your answer.
10.Supposing you find two people arguing: One is saying globalisation has hurt our country’s development. The other is telling, globalisation is helping India develop.
How would you respond to these arguments?
11. Fill in the blanks.
Indian buyers have a greater choice of goods than they did two decades back. This is closely associated with the process of ______________. Markets in India are selling goods produced in many other countries. This means there is increasing
______________ with other countries. Moreover, the rising number of brands that we see in the markets might be produced by MNCs in India. MNCs are investing in India because _____________ ___________________________________________ . While consumers have more choices in the market, the effect of rising _______________ and ______________has meant greater _________________among the producers.
12.Match the following.
(i) MNCs buy at cheap rates from small (a) Automobiles producers (ii) Quotas and taxes on imports are used to (b) Garments, footwear, sports regulate trade items (iii) Indian companies who have invested abroad (c) Call centres (iv) IT has helped in spreading of (d) Tata Motors, Infosys, Ranbaxy production of services (v) Several MNCs have invested in setting (e) Trade barriers up factories in India for production
EXERCISES
72 72 72 72 72 U U U U UNDERST NDERST NDERST NDERST NDERSTANDING ANDING ANDING ANDING ANDING E E E E ECONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC D D D D DEVEL EVEL EVEL EVEL EVELOPMENT OPMENT OPMENT OPMENT OPMENT
Reprint 2026-27
ADDITIONAL ACTIVITY / PROJECT
13.Choose the most appropriate option.
(i) The past two decades of globalisation has seen rapid movements in (a) goods, services and people between countries.
(b) goods, services and investments between countries.
(c) goods, investments and people between countries.
(ii) The most common route for investments by MNCs in countries around the world is to (a) set up new factories.
(b) buy existing local companies.
(c) form partnerships with local companies.
(iii) Globalisation has led to improvement in living conditions (a) of all the people (b) of people in the developed countries (c) of workers in the developing countries (d) none of the above
I. Take some branded products that we use everyday (soaps, toothpaste, garments, electronic goods, etc.). Check which of these are produced by MNCs.
II. Take any Indian industry or service of your choice. Collect information and photographs from newspapers, magazine clippings, books, television, internet, interviews with people on the following aspects of the industry.
(i) Various producers/companies in the industry (ii) Is the product exported to other countries?
(iii) Are there MNCs among the producers?
(iv) Competition in the industry (v) Conditions of work in the industry (vi) Has there been any major change in the industry in the past 15 years?
(vii) Problems that people in the industry face.
G G G G GLLLLLOBALISA OBALISA OBALISA OBALISA OBALISATION TION TION TION TION AND AND AND AND AND THE THE THE THE THE IIIIINDIAN NDIAN NDIAN NDIAN NDIAN E E E E ECONOMY CONOMY CONOMY CONOMY CONOMY 73 73 73 73 73
Reprint 2026-27
NOTES FOR THE TEACHER
This chapter proposes to discuss the issue of consumer rights within the context of the ways markets operate in our country. There are many aspects of unequal situations in a market and poor enforcement of rules and regulations.
Hence, there is a need to sensitise learners and encourage them to participate in the consumer movement. This chapter provides case histories
— how some consumers were exploited in real life situation and how legal institutions helped consumers in getting compensated and in upholding their rights. The case histories would enable the students to link these narratives to their life experiences. We have to enable students to understand that the awareness of being a well-informed consumer arose out of consumer movement and active participation of people through their struggles over a long period. This chapter also provides details of a few organisations helping consumers in different ways. Finally, it ends with some critical issues of the consumer movement in India.
Aspects of Teaching / Sources of
Information
This chapter has questions, case studies and activities. It would be preferred that students discuss these in groups orally. Some of these could be answered in writing individually.
While carrying out each activity you could start with a brainstorming session about the activity. Similarly, there are many opportunities for roleplay in this chapter and this could be a useful way to share their experiences and understand the issues at a deeper level. Making
CHAPTER 5 : CONSUMER RIGHTS
74 74 74 74 74 U U U U UNDERST NDERST NDERST NDERST NDERSTANDING ANDING ANDING ANDING ANDING E E E E ECONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC D D D D DEVEL EVEL EVEL EVEL EVELOPMENT OPMENT OPMENT OPMENT OPMENT posters collectively is another way to think about these issues. This lesson contains activities, which require visits — visit to consumer protection councils, consumer organisations,
District/State/National level Consumer
Disputes Redressal Commissions, retail shops, marketplaces, etc. Organise the visits to maximise learners’ experience. Have a discussion with them about the purpose of the visit, things they need to do beforehand and things that need to be collected and the task (report/ project / article, etc.) they would carry out after the visit. As part of this chapter, the learners may do letter-writing and speaking activities. We may have to be sensitive to the language aspect of exercises.
This chapter contains material collected from authenticated websites, books, newspapers and magazines. For example, https://consumer affairs.nic.in is a website of Central Government
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public
Distribution. Another website www.cuts- international.org is the website of a consumer organisation working in India for 40 years. It publishes a variety of material to create consumer awareness in India. They need to be shared among learners so that they can also collect material as part of their activities. For example, case histories were taken from newspaper clippings and consumers who fought in Consumer Disputes Redressal Commissions.
Let learners collect and read such material from different sources: consumer protection councils,
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commissions and internet.
Reprint 2026-27
CONSUMER RIGHTS CONSUMER RIGHTS CONSUMER RIGHTS CONSUMER RIGHTS CONSUMER RIGHTS
CHAPTER 5
The collage you see below contains some news clippings of Consumer
Disputes Redressal Commission verdicts. Why did the people go to these organisations in these cases?
These verdicts came about because some people persisted and struggled to get justice. In what ways were they denied justice? More importantly, what are the ways in which they can exercise their rights as consumers to get a fair deal from the sellers when they felt they had been denied a just treatment?
Reprint 2026-27
We participate in the market both as producers and consumers. As producers of goods and services we could be working in any of the sectors discussed earlier such as agriculture, industry, or services. Consumers participate in the market when they purchase goods and services that they need. These are the final goods that people as consumers use.
In the preceding chapters we discussed the need for rules and regulations or steps that would promote development. These could be for the protection of workers in the unorganised sector or to protect people from high interest rates charged by moneylenders in the informal sector. Similarly, rules and regulations are also required for protecting the environment.
For example, moneylenders in the informal sector that you read about in Chapter 3 adopt various tricks to bind the borrower: they could make the producer sell the produce to them at a low rate in return for a timely loan;
they could force a small farmer like
Swapna to sell her land to pay back the loan. Similarly, many people who work in the unorganised sector have to work at a low wage and accept conditions that are not fair and are also often harmful to their health. To prevent such exploitation, we have talked of rules and regulations for their protection. There are organisations that have struggled for long to ensure that these rules are followed.
THE CONSUMER IN THE MARKETPLACE
Likewise, rules and regulations are required for the protection of the consumers in the marketplace.
Individual consumers often find themselves in a weak position.
Whenever there is a complaint regarding a good or service that had been bought, the seller tries to shift all the responsibility on to the buyer.
Their position usually is – “If you didn’t like what you bought, please go elsewhere”. As if the seller has no responsibility once a sale is completed! The consumer movement, as we shall discuss later, is an effort to change this situation.
Exploitation in the marketplace happens in various ways. For example, sometimes traders indulge in unfair trade practices such as when shopkeepers weigh less than what they should or when traders add charges that were not mentioned before, or when adulterated/defective goods are sold.
Markets do not work in a fair manner when producers are few and powerful whereas consumers purchase in small amounts and are scattered. This happens especially when large companies are producing these goods. These companies with huge wealth, power and reach can manipulate the market in various ways. At times false information is passed on through the media, and other sources to attract consumers.
For example, a company for years sold powder milk for babies all over
THEY PURPOSELY MADE IT
SO IT WOULD FALL APART
AFTER A FEW MONTHS SO
THAT I WILL BUY A NEW ONE!
Reprint 2026-27
77 77 77 77 77 C C C C CONSUMER ONSUMER ONSUMER ONSUMER ONSUMER R R R R RIGHTS IGHTS IGHTS IGHTS IGHTS
1. What are the various ways by which people may be exploited in the market?
2. Think of one example from your experience where you thought that there was some
‘cheating’ in the market. Discuss in the classroom.
3. What do you think should be the role of government to protect consumers?
LET’S WORK THESE OUT the world as the most scientific product claiming this to be better than mother’s milk. It took years of struggle before the company was forced to accept that it had been making false claims. Similarly, a long battle had to be fought with court cases to make cigarette- manufacturing companies accept that their product could cause cancer.
Hence, there is a need for rules and regulations to ensure protection for consumers.
CONSUMER MOVEMENT quality of goods and services on the sellers.
In India, the consumer movement as a ‘social force’ originated with the necessity of protecting and promoting the interests of consumers against unethical and unfair trade practices.
Rampant food shortages, hoarding, black marketing, adulteration of food and edible oil gave birth to the consumer movement in an organised form in the 1960s. Till the 1970s, consumer organisations were largely engaged in writing articles and holding exhibitions. They formed consumer groups to look into the malpractices in ration shops and overcrowding in the road passenger transport. More recently, India witnessed an upsurge in the number of consumer groups.
The consumer movement arose out of dissatisfaction of the consumers as many unfair practices were being indulged in by the sellers. There was no legal system available to consumers to protect them from exploitation in the marketplace. For a long time, when a consumer was not happy with a particular brand product or shop, he or she generally avoided buying that brand product, or would stop purchasing from that shop. It was presumed that it was the responsibility of consumers to be careful while buying a commodity or service. It took many years for organisations in India, and around the world, to create awareness amongst people. This has also shifted the responsibility of ensuring
EVERYONE KNOWS
TOBACCO KILLS PEOPLE,
BUT WHO CAN SAY THAT
TOBACCO COMPANIES
SHOULD NOT BE FREE
TO SELL TOBACCO?
Reprint 2026-27
1. What could have been the steps taken by consumer groups?
2. There may be rules and regulations but they are often not followed. Why? Discuss.
LET’S WORK THESE OUT
Consumers International
In 1985 United Nations adopted the UN Guidelines for Consumer
Protection. This was a tool for nations to adopt measures to protect consumers and for consumer advocacy groups to press their governments to do so. At the international level, this has become the foundation for consumer movement. Today,
Consumers International has become an umbrella body to over 200 member organisations from over 100 countries.
Because of all these efforts, the movement succeeded in bringing pressure on business firms as well as government to correct business conduct which may be unfair and against the interests of consumers at large. A major step taken in
1986 by the Indian government was the enactment of the
Consumer Protection Act 1986, popularly known as COPRA.
This Act was amended in 2019. You will learn more about
COPRA later.
Reprint 2026-27
79 79 79 79 79 C C C C CONSUMER ONSUMER ONSUMER ONSUMER ONSUMER R R R R RIGHTS IGHTS IGHTS IGHTS IGHTS
SAFETY IS EVERYONE’S RIGHT
Reji’s Suffering Reji’s Suffering Reji’s Suffering Reji’s Suffering Reji’s Suffering
CONSUMER RIGHTS
Reji’s suffering shows how a hospital, due to negligence by the doctors and staff in giving anaesthesia, crippled a student for life. While using many goods and services, we as consumers, have the right to be protected against the marketing of goods and delivery of services that are hazardous to life and property. Producers need to strictly follow the required safety rules and regulations. There are many goods and services that we purchase that require special attention to safety. For example, pressure cookers have a safety valve which, if it is defective, can cause a serious accident. The manufacturers of the safety valve have to ensure high quality. You also need public or government action to see that this quality is maintained.
However, we do find bad quality products in the market because the supervision of these rules is weak and the consumer movement is also not strong enough.
1. For the following (you can add to the list) products/services discuss what safety rules should be observed by the producer?
(a) LPG cylinder (b) cinema theatre (c) circus (d) medicines (e) edible oil (f) marriage pandal (g) a high-rise building.
2. Find out any case of accident or negligence from people around you, where you think that the responsibility lay with the producer. Discuss.
LET’S WORK THESE OUT
Reji Mathew, a healthy boy studying in
Class IX, was admitted in a private clinic in
Kerala for removal of tonsils. An ENT surgeon perfor med the tonsillectomy operation under general anaesthesia. As a result of improper anaesthesia Reji showed symptoms of some brain abnormalities because of which he was crippled for life.
His father filed a complaint in the State
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission claiming compensation of Rs 5,00,000 for medical negligence and deficiency, in service. The State Commission, saying that the evidence was not sufficient, dismissed it. Reji’s father appealed again in the
National Consumer Disputes Redressal
Commission located in New Delhi. The
National Commission after looking into the complaint, held the hospital responsible for medical negligence and directed it to pay the compensation.
Reprint 2026-27
80 80 80 80 80 U U U U UNDERST NDERST NDERST NDERST NDERSTANDING ANDING ANDING ANDING ANDING E E E E ECONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC D D D D DEVEL EVEL EVEL EVEL EVELOPMENT OPMENT OPMENT OPMENT OPMENT
Information about goods and services
When you buy any commodity, you will find certain details given on the packing. These details are about ingredients used, price, batch number, date of manufacture, expiry date and the address of the manufacturer. When we buy medicines, on the packets, you might find ‘directions for proper use’ and information relating to side effects and risks associated with usage of that medicine. When you buy garments, you will find information on
‘instructions for washing’.
Why is it that rules have been made so that the manufacturer displays this information? It is because consumers have the right to be informed about the particulars of goods and services that they purchase. Consumers can then complain and ask for compensation or replacement if the product proves to be defective in any manner. For example, if we buy a product and find it defective well within the expiry period, we can ask for a replacement. If the expiry period was not printed, the manufacturer would blame the shopkeeper and will not accept the responsibility. If people sell medicines that have expired severe action can be taken against them. Simil
