chest a large, light but strong wooden plank is placed first, is saved from this accident. Such everyday experiences convince us that both the force and its coverage area are important. Smaller the area on which the force acts, greater is the impact. This impact is known as pressure.
When an object is submerged in a fluid at rest, the fluid exerts a force on its surface. This force is always normal to the object’s surface.
This is so because if there were a component of force parallel to the surface, the object will also exert a force on the fluid parallel to it; as a consequence of Newton’s third law. This force will cause the fluid to flow parallel to the surface.
Since the fluid is at rest, this cannot happen.
Hence, the force exerted by the fluid at rest has to be perpendicular to the surface in contact with it. This is shown in Fig.9.1(a).
The normal force exerted by the fluid at a point may be measured. An idealised form of one such pressure-measuring device is shown in Fig.
9.1(b). It consists of an evacuated chamber with a spring that is calibrated to measure the force acting on the piston. This device is placed at a point inside the fluid. The inward force exerted by the fluid on the piston is balanced by the outward spring force and is thereby measured.
If F is the magnitude of this normal force on the piston of area A then the average pressure Pav is defined as the normal force acting per unit
A av = (9.1)
In principle, the piston area can be made arbitrarily small. The pressure is then defined in a limiting sense as
Pressure is a scalar quantity. We remind the reader that it is the component of the force normal to the area under consideration and not the (vector) force that appears in the numerator in Eqs. (9.1) and (9.2). Its dimensions are
[ML–1T–2]. The SI unit of pressure is N m–2. It has been named as pascal (Pa) in honour of the
French scientist Blaise Pascal (1623-1662) who carried out pioneering studies on fluid pressure.
A common unit of pressure is the atmosphere (atm), i.e. the pressure exerted by the atmosphere at sea level (1 atm = 1.013 × 105 Pa).
Another quantity, that is indispensable in describing fluids, is the density
ρ. For a fluid of mass m occupying volume V,
The dimensions of density are [ML–3]. Its SI unit is kg m–3. It is a positive scalar quantity. A liquid is largely incompressible and its density is therefore, nearly constant at all pressures.
Gases, on the other hand exhibit a large variation in densities with pressure.
The density of water at 4oC (277 K) is
1.0 × 103 kg m–3. The relative density of a substance is the ratio of its density to the density of water at 4oC. It is a dimensionless positive scalar quantity. For example the relative density of aluminium is 2.7. Its density is
2.7 × 103 kg m–3
. The densities of some common fluids are displayed in Table 9.1.
Table 9.1 Densities of some common fluids at STP* (a) (b)
Fig. 9.1 (a) The force exerted by the liquid in the beaker on the submerged object or on the walls is normal (perpendicular) to the surface at all points.
(b) An idealised device for measuring pressure.
* STP means standard temperature (00C) and 1 atm pressure.
MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS 181
Reprint 2026-27
182 PHYSICS
Example 9.1 The two thigh bones (femurs), each of cross-sectional area10 cm2 support the upper part of a human body of mass 40 kg. Estimate the average pressure sustained by the femurs.
Answer Total cross-sectional area of the femurs is A = 2 × 10 cm2 = 20 × 10–4 m2. The force acting on them is F = 40 kg wt = 400 N (taking g = 10 m s–2). This force is acting vertically down and hence, normally on the femurs. Thus, the average pressure is
2 5 m N 10 2 −
9.2.1 Pascal’s Law
The French scientist Blaise Pascal observed that the pressure in a fluid at rest is the same at all points if they are at the same height. This fact may be demonstrated in a simple way.
Fig. 9.2 shows an element in the interior of a fluid at rest. This element ABC-DEF is in the form of a right-angled prism. In principle, this prismatic element is very small so that every part of it can be considered at the same depth from the liquid surface and therefore, the effect of the gravity is the same at all these points.
But for clarity we have enlarged this element.
The forces on this element are those exerted by the rest of the fluid and they must be normal to the surfaces of the element as discussed above.
Thus, the fluid exerts pressures Pa, Pb and Pc on this element of area corresponding to the normal forces Fa, Fb and Fc as shown in Fig. 9.2 on the faces BEFC, ADFC and ADEB denoted by Aa, Ab and Ac respectively. Then
Fb sinθ = Fc, Fb cosθ = Fa (by equilibrium)
Ab sinθ = Ac, Ab cosθ = Aa (by geometry)
F F F P P P
= = = = (9.4)
Hence, pressure exerted is same in all directions in a fluid at rest. It again reminds us that like other types of stress, pressure is not a vector quantity. No direction can be assigned to it. The force against any area within (or bounding) a fluid at rest and under pressure is normal to the area, regardless of the orientation of the area.
Now consider a fluid element in the form of a horizontal bar of uniform cross-section. The bar is in equilibrium. The horizontal forces exerted at its two ends must be balanced or the pressure at the two ends should be equal. This proves that for a liquid in equilibrium the pressure is same at all points in a horizontal plane. Suppose the pressure were not equal in different parts of the fluid, then there would be a flow as the fluid will have some net force acting on it. Hence in the absence of flow the pressure in the fluid must be same everywhere in a horizontal plane.
9.2.2 Variation of Pressure with Depth
Consider a fluid at rest in a container. In
Fig. 9.3 point 1 is at height h above a point 2.
The pressures at points 1 and 2 are P1 and P2 respectively. Consider a cylindrical element of fluid having area of base A and height h. As the fluid is at rest the resultant horizontal forces should be zero and the resultant vertical forces should balance the weight of the element. The forces acting in the vertical direction are due to the fluid pressure at the top (P1A) acting downward, at the bottom (P2A) acting upward.
If mg is weight of the fluid in the cylinder we (P2 − P1) A = mg (9.5)
Now, if ρ is the mass density of the fluid, we have the mass of fluid to be m = ρV= ρhA so
P2 − P1= ρgh (9.6)
Fig. 9.2 Proof of Pascal’s law. ABC-DEF is an element of the interior of a fluid at rest.
This element is in the form of a right- angled prism. The element is small so that the effect of gravity can be ignored, but it has been enlarged for the sake of clarity.
Reprint 2026-27
MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS 183
Fig.9.3 Fluid under gravity. The effect of gravity is illustrated through pressure on a vertical cylindrical column.
Pressure difference depends on the vertical distance h between the points (1 and 2), mass density of the fluid ρ and acceleration due to gravity g. If the point 1 under discussion is shifted to the top of the fluid (say, water), which is open to the atmosphere, P1 may be replaced by atmospheric pressure (Pa) and we replace P2 by P. Then Eq. (9.6) gives
P = Pa + ρgh (9.7)
Thus, the pressure P, at depth below the surface of a liquid open to the atmosphere is greater than atmospheric pressure by an amount ρgh. The excess of pressure, P − Pa, at depth h is called a gauge pressure at that point.
The area of the cylinder is not appearing in the expression of absolute pressure in Eq. (9.7).
Thus, the height of the fluid column is important and not cross-sectional or base area or the shape of the container. The liquid pressure is the same at all points at the same horizontal level (same depth). The result is appreciated through the example of hydrostatic paradox. Consider three vessels A, B and C [Fig.9.4] of different shapes.
They are connected at the bottom by a horizontal pipe. On filling with water, the level in the three vessels is the same, though they hold different amounts of water. This is so because water at the bottom has the same pressure below each section of the vessel.
Fig 9.4 Illustration of hydrostatic paradox. The three vessels A, B and C contain different amounts of liquids, all upto the same
Example 9.2 What is the pressure on a swimmer 10 m below the surface of a lake?
Answer Here h = 10 m and
ρ = 1000 kg m-3. Take g = 10 m s–2
From Eq. (9.7)
P = Pa + ρgh
= 1.01 × 105 Pa + 1000 kg m–3 × 10 m s–2 × 10 m
= 2.01 × 105 Pa
This is a 100% increase in pressure from surface level. At a depth of 1 km, the increase in pressure is 100 atm! Submarines are designed to withstand such enormous pressures. ⊳
9.2.3 Atmospheric Pressure and
Gauge Pressure
The pressure of the atmosphere at any point is equal to the weight of a column of air of unit cross-sectional area extending from that point to the top of the atmosphere. At sea level, it is
1.013 × 105 Pa (1 atm). Italian scientist
Evangelista Torricelli (1608 –1647) devised for the first time a method for measuring atmospheric pressure. A long glass tube closed at one end and filled with mercury is inverted into a trough of mercury as shown in Fig.9.5 (a).
This device is known as ‘mercury barometer’.
The space above the mercury column in the tube contains only mercury vapour whose pressure
P is so small that it may be neglected. Thus, the pressure at Point A=0. The pressure inside the coloumn at Point B must be the same as the pressure at Point C, which is atmospheric pressure, Pa.
Pa = ρgh (9.8)
where ρ is the density of mercury and h is the height of the mercury column in the tube.
Reprint 2026-27
184 PHYSICS
In the experiment it is found that the mercury column in the barometer has a height of about
76 cm at sea level equivalent to one atmosphere (1 atm). This can also be obtained using the value of ρ in Eq. (9.8). A common way of stating pressure is in terms of cm or mm of mercury (Hg). A pressure equivalent of 1 mm is called a torr (after Torricelli).
1 torr = 133 Pa.
The mm of Hg and torr are used in medicine and physiology. In meteorology, a common unit is the bar and millibar.
1 bar = 105 Pa
An open tube manometer is a useful instrument for measuring pressure differences.
It consists of a U-tube containing a suitable liquid i.e., a low density liquid (such as oil) for measuring small pressure differences and a high density liquid (such as mercury) for large pressure differences. One end of the tube is open to the atmosphere and the other end is connected to the system whose pressure we want to measure [see Fig. 9.5 (b)]. The pressure P at A is equal to pressure at point B. What we normally measure is the gauge pressure, which is P − Pa, given by Eq. (9.8) and is proportional to manometer height h.
Pressure is same at the same level on both sides of the U-tube containing a fluid. For liquids, the density varies very little over wide ranges in pressure and temperature and we can treat it safely as a constant for our present purposes. Gases on the other hand, exhibits large variations of densities with changes in pressure and temperature. Unlike gases, liquids are, therefore, largely treated as incompressible.
Example 9.3 The density of the atmosphere at sea level is 1.29 kg/m3.
Assume that it does not change with altitude. Then how high would the atmosphere extend?
Answer We use Eq. (9.7)
ρgh = 1.29 kg m–3 × 9.8 m s2 × h m = 1.01 × 105 Pa
∴ h = 7989 m ≈ 8 km
In reality the density of air decreases with height. So does the value of g. The atmospheric cover extends with decreasing pressure over
100 km. We should also note that the sea level atmospheric pressure is not always 760 mm of
Hg. A drop in the Hg level by 10 mm or more is a sign of an approaching storm. ⊳
Example 9.4 At a depth of 1000 m in an ocean (a) what is the absolute pressure?
(b) What is the gauge pressure? (c) Find the force acting on the window of area
20 cm × 20 cm of a submarine at this depth, the interior of which is maintained at sea- level atmospheric pressure. (The density of sea water is 1.03 × 103 kg m-3, g = 10 m s–2.)
(b) The open tube manometer
Fig 9.5 Two pressure measuring devices.
Fig 9.5 (a) The mercury barometer.
Reprint 2026-27
MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS 185
Answer Here h = 1000 m and ρ = 1.03 × 103 kg m-3.
(a) From Eq. (9.6), absolute pressure
P = Pa + ρgh
= 1.01 × 105 Pa
+ 1.03 × 103 kg m–3 × 10 m s–2 × 1000 m
= 104.01 × 105 Pa
≈ 104 atm (b) Gauge pressure is P − Pa = ρgh = Pg
Pg = 1.03 × 103 kg m–3 × 10 ms2 × 1000 m
= 103 × 105 Pa
≈ 103 atm (c) The pressure outside the submarine is
P = Pa + ρgh and the pressure inside it is Pa.
Hence, the net pressure acting on the window is gauge pressure, Pg = ρgh. Since the area of the window is A = 0.04 m2, the force acting on it is
F = Pg A = 103 × 105 Pa × 0.04 m2 = 4.12 × 105 N
9.2.4 Hydraulic Machines
Let us now consider what happens when we change the pressure on a fluid contained in a vessel. Consider a horizontal cylinder with a piston and three vertical tubes at different points
[Fig. 9.6 (a)]. The pressure in the horizontal cylinder is indicated by the height of liquid column in the vertical tubes. It is necessarily the same in all. If we push the piston, the fluid level rises in all the tubes, again reaching the same level in each one of them.
law. In these devices, fluids are used for transmitting pressure. In a hydraulic lift, as shown in Fig. 9.6 (b), two pistons are separated by the space filled with a liquid. A piston of small cross-section A1 is used to exert a force F1 directly on the liquid. The pressure P = 1 transmitted throughout the liquid to the larger cylinder attached with a larger piston of area A2, which results in an upward force of P × A2.
Therefore, the piston is capable of supporting a large force (large weight of, say a car, or a truck, placed on the platform) F2 = PA2 = 1 2 changing the force at A1, the platform can be moved up or down. Thus, the applied force has been increased by a factor of 2
A and this factor is the mechanical advantage of the device. The example below clarifies it.
Fig 9.6 (a) Whenever external pressure is applied on any part of a fluid in a vessel, it is equally transmitted in all directions.
This indicates that when the pressure on the cylinder was increased, it was distributed uniformly throughout. We can say whenever external pressure is applied on any part of a fluid contained in a vessel, it is transmitted undiminished and equally in all directions.
This is another form of the Pascal’s law and it has many applications in daily life.
A number of devices, such as hydraulic lift and hydraulic brakes, are based on the Pascal’s
Fig 9.6 (b) Schematic diagram illustrating the principle behind the hydraulic lift, a device used to lift heavy loads.
Example 9.5 Two syringes of different cross-sections (without needles) filled with water are connected with a tightly fitted rubber tube filled with water. Diameters of the smaller piston and larger piston are
1.0 cm and 3.0 cm respectively. (a) Find the force exerted on the larger piston when a force of 10 N is applied to the smaller piston. (b) If the smaller piston is pushed in through 6.0 cm, how much does the larger piston move out?
Answer (a) Since pressure is transmitted undiminished throughout the fluid,
Reprint 2026-27
186 PHYSICS
2 1 2 –2
3 /2 10 m 10 N
1/2 10 m (b) Water is considered to be per fectly incompressible. Volume covered by the movement of smaller piston inwards is equal to volume moved outwards due to the larger piston.
2 2 1 1 A L A L = j 0.67 × 10-2 m = 0.67 cm
Note, atmospheric pressure is common to both pistons and has been ignored. ⊳
Example 9.6 In a car lift compressed air exerts a force F1 on a small piston having a radius of 5.0 cm. This pressure is transmitted to a second piston of radius
15 cm (Fig 9.7). If the mass of the car to be lifted is 1350 kg, calculate F1. What is the pressure necessary to accomplish this task? (g = 9.8 ms-2).
Answer Since pressure is transmitted undiminished throughout the fluid,
= 1470 N
≈ 1.5 × 103 N
The air pressure that will produce this force is
This is almost double the atmospheric pressure. ⊳
Hydraulic brakes in automobiles also work on the same principle. When we apply a little force on the pedal with our foot the master piston moves inside the master cylinder, and the pressure caused is transmitted through the brake oil to act on a piston of larger area. A large force acts on the piston and is pushed down expanding the brake shoes against brake lining.
In this way, a small force on the pedal produces a large retarding force on the wheel. An important advantage of the system is that the pressure set up by pressing pedal is transmitted equally to all cylinders attached to the four wheels so that the braking effort is equal on all wheels.
9.3 STREAMLINE FLOW
So far we have studied fluids at rest. The study of the fluids in motion is known as fluid dynamics. When a water tap is turned on slowly, the water flow is smooth initially, but loses its smoothness when the speed of the outflow is increased. In studying the motion of fluids, we focus our attention on what is happening to various fluid particles at a particular point in space at a particular time. The flow of the fluid is said to be steady if at any given point, the velocity of each passing fluid particle remains constant in time. This does not mean that the velocity at different points in space is same. The velocity of a particular particle may change as it moves from one point to another. That is, at some other point the particle may have a different velocity, but every other particle which passes the second point behaves exactly as the previous particle that has just passed that point. Each particle follows a smooth path, and the paths of the particles do not cross each other.
Fig. 9.7 The meaning of streamlines. (a) A typical trajectory of a fluid particle.
(b) A region of streamline flow.
The path taken by a fluid particle under a stead
