THERMODYNAMICS 229
11.4 HEAT, INTERNAL ENERGY AND WORK
The Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics led us to the concept of temperature that agrees with our commonsense notion. Temperature is a marker of the ‘hotness’ of a body. It determines the direction of flow of heat when two bodies are placed in thermal contact. Heat flows from the body at a higher temperature to the one at lower temperature. The flow stops when the temperatures equalise; the two bodies are then in thermal equilibrium. We saw in some detail how to construct temperature scales to assign temperatures to different bodies. We now describe the concepts of heat and other relevant quantities like internal energy and work.
The concept of internal energy of a system is not difficult to understand. We know that every bulk system consists of a large number of molecules. Internal energy is simply the sum of the kinetic energies and potential energies of these molecules. We remarked earlier that in thermodynamics, the kinetic energy of the system, as a whole, is not relevant. Internal energy is thus, the sum of molecular kinetic and potential energies in the frame of reference relative to which the centre of mass of the system is at rest. Thus, it includes only the (disordered)
energy associated with the random motion of molecules of the system. We denote the internal energy of a system by U.
Though we have invoked the molecular picture to understand the meaning of internal energy, as far as thermodynamics is concerned,
U is simply a macroscopic variable of the system.
The important thing about internal energy is that it depends only on the state of the system, not on how that state was achieved. Internal energy U of a system is an example of a thermodynamic ‘state variable’ – its value depends only on the given state of the system, not on history i.e. not on the ‘path’ taken to arrive at that state. Thus, the internal energy of a given mass of gas depends on its state described by specific values of pressure, volume and temperature. It does not depend on how this state of the gas came about. Pressure, volume, temperature, and internal energy are thermodynamic state variables of the system (gas) (see section 11.7). If we neglect the small intermolecular forces in a gas, the internal energy of a gas is just the sum of kinetic energies associated with various random motions of its molecules. We will see in the next chapter that in a gas this motion is not only translational (i.e. motion from one point to another in the volume of the container); it also includes rotational and vibrational motion of the molecules (Fig. 11.3).
Fig. 11.3 (a) Internal energy U of a gas is the sum of the kinetic and potential energies of its molecules when the box is at rest. Kinetic energy due to various types of motion (translational, rotational, vibrational) is to be included in U. (b) If the same box is moving as a whole with some velocity, the kinetic energy of the box is not to be included in U.
Fig. 11.4 Heat and work are two distinct modes of energy transfer to a system that results in change in its internal energy. (a) Heat is energy transfer due to temperature difference between the system and the surroundings. (b) Work is energy transfer brought about by means (e.g. moving the piston by raising or lowering some weight connected to it) that do not involve such a temperature difference.
Reprint 2026-27
PHYSICS 230
What are the ways of changing internal energy of a system ? Consider again, for simplicity, the system to be a certain mass of gas contained in a cylinder with a movable piston as shown in Fig. 11.4. Experience shows there are two ways of changing the state of the gas (and hence its internal energy). One way is to put the cylinder in contact with a body at a higher temperature than that of the gas. The temperature difference will cause a flow of energy (heat) from the hotter body to the gas, thus increasing the internal energy of the gas.
The other way is to push the piston down i.e. to do work on the system, which again results in increasing the internal energy of the gas. Of course, both these things could happen in the reverse direction. With surroundings at a lower temperature, heat would flow from the gas to the surroundings. Likewise, the gas could push the piston up and do work on the surroundings.
In short, heat and work are two different modes of altering the state of a thermodynamic system and changing its internal energy.
The notion of heat should be carefully distinguished from the notion of internal energy.
Heat is certainly energy, but it is the energy in transit. This is not just a play of words. The distinction is of basic significance. The state of a thermodynamic system is characterised by its internal energy, not heat. A statement like ‘a gas in a given state has a certain amount of heat’ is as meaningless as the statement that
‘a gas in a given state has a certain amount of work’. In contrast, ‘a gas in a given state has a certain amount of internal energy’ is a perfectly meaningful statement. Similarly, the statements ‘a certain amount of heat is supplied to the system’ or ‘a certain amount of work was done by the system’ are perfectly meaningful.
To summarise, heat and work in thermodynamics are not state variables. They are modes of energy transfer to a system resulting in change in its internal energy, which, as already mentioned, is a state variable.
In ordinary language, we often confuse heat with internal energy. The distinction between them is sometimes ignored in elementary physics books. For proper understanding of thermodynamics, however, the distinction is crucial.
11.5 FIRST LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS
We have seen that the internal energy U of a system can change through two modes of energy transfer : heat and work. Let
∆Q = Heat supplied to the system by the surroundings
∆W = Work done by the system on the surroundings
∆U = Change in internal energy of the system
The general principle of conservation of energy then implies that
∆Q = ∆U + ∆W (11.1)
i.e. the energy (∆Q) supplied to the system goes in partly to increase the internal energy of the system (∆U) and the rest in work on the environment (∆W). Equation (11.1) is known as the First Law of Thermodynamics. It is simply the general law of conservation of energy applied to any system in which the energy transfer from or to the surroundings is taken into account.
Let us put Eq. (11.1) in the alternative form
∆Q – ∆W = ∆U (11.2)
Now, the system may go from an initial state to the final state in a number of ways. For example, to change the state of a gas from (P1, V1) to (P2, V2), we can first change the volume of the gas from V1 to V2, keeping its pressure constant i.e. we can first go the state (P1, V2) and then change the pressure of the gas from P1 to P2, keeping volume constant, to take the gas to (P2, V2). Alternatively, we can first keep the volume constant and then keep the pressure constant. Since U is a state variable, ∆U depends only on the initial and final states and not on the path taken by the gas to go from one to the other. However, ∆Q and ∆W will, in general, depend on the path taken to go from the initial to final states. From the First Law of Thermodynamics, Eq. (11.2), it is clear that the combination ∆Q – ∆W, is however, path independent. This shows that if a system is taken through a process in which
∆U = 0 (for example, isothermal expansion of an ideal gas, see section 11.8), i.e., heat supplied to the system is used up entirely by the system in doing work on the environment.
Reprint 2026-27
THERMODYNAMICS 231
If the system is a gas in a cylinder with a movable piston, the gas in moving the piston does work. Since force is pressure times area, and area times displacement is volume, work done by the system against a constant pressure P is
∆W = P ∆V where ∆V is the change in volume of the gas.
Thus, for this case, Eq. (11.1) gives
∆Q = ∆U + P ∆V (11.3)
As an application of Eq. (11.3), consider the change in internal energy for 1 g of water when we go from its liquid to vapour phase. The measured latent heat of water is 2256 J/g. i.e., for 1 g of water ∆Q = 2256 J. At atmospheric pressure, 1 g of water has a volume 1 cm3 in liquid phase and 1671 cm3 in vapour phase.
Therefore,
∆W =P (Vg –Vl ) = 1.013 ×105 × (1671 × 10–6) =169.2 J
Equation (11.3) then gives
∆U = 2256 – 169.2 = 2086.8 J
We see that most of the heat goes to increase the internal energy of water in transition from the liquid to the vapour phase.
11.6 SPECIFIC HEAT CAPACITY
Suppose an amount of heat ∆Q supplied to a substance changes its temperature from T to
T + ∆T. We define heat capacity of a substance (see Chapter 10) to be
= (11.4)
We expect ∆Q and, therefore, heat capacity S to be proportional to the mass of the substance.
Further, it could also depend on the temperature, i.e., a different amount of heat may be needed for a unit rise in temperature at different temperatures. To define a constant characteristic of the substance and independent of its amount, we divide S by the mass of the substance m in kg :
∆ (11.5)
s is known as the specific heat capacity of the substance. It depends on the nature of the substance and its temperature. The unit of specific heat capacity is J kg–1 K–1.
If the amount of substance is specified in terms of moles μ (instead of mass m in kg ), we can define heat capacity per mole of the substance by
= = ∆ (11.6)
C is known as molar specific heat capacity of the substance. Like s, C is independent of the amount of substance. C depends on the nature of the substance, its temperature and the conditions under which heat is supplied. The unit of C is J mo1–1 K–1. As we shall see later (in connection with specific heat capacity of gases), additional conditions may be needed to define
C or s. The idea in defining C is that simple predictions can be made in regard to molar specific heat capacities.
Table 11.1 lists measured specific and molar heat capacities of solids at atmospheric pressure and ordinary room temperature.
We will see in Chapter 12 that predictions of specific heats of gases generally agree with experiment. We can use the same law of equipartition of energy that we use there to predict molar specific heat capacities of solids (See Section 12.5 and 12.6). Consider a solid of
N atoms, each vibrating about its mean position. An oscillator in one dimension has average energy of 2 × ½ kBT = kBT. In three dimensions, the average energy is 3 kBT.
For a mole of a solid, the total energy is
U = 3 kBT × NA = 3 RT (∵kBT × NA = R )
Now, at constant pressure, ∆Q = ∆U + P ∆V ≅
∆U, since for a solid ∆V is negligible. Therefore,
T R = = =
∆ 3 (11.7)
Table 11.1 Specific and molar heat capacities of some solids at room temperature and atmospheric pressure
As Table 11.1 shows, the experimentally measured values which generally agrees with
Substance Speci"c heat –v (J kg K )
Molar speci"c heat (J mol K ) –1 –1
Reprint 2026-27
PHYSICS 232 predicted value 3R at ordinary temperatures.
(Carbon is an exception.) The agreement is known to break down at low temperatures.
Specific heat capacity of water
The old unit of heat was calorie. One calorie was earlier defined to be the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of 1g of water by 1°C. With more precise measurements, it was found that the specific heat of water varies slightly with temperature. Figure 11.5 shows this variation in the temperature range 0 to
Fig. 11.5 Variation of specific heat capacity of water with temperature.
For a precise definition of calorie, it was, therefore, necessary to specify the unit temperature interval. One calorie is defined to be the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of 1g of water from 14.5 °C to
15.5 °C. Since heat is just a form of energy, it is preferable to use the unit joule, J.
In SI units, the specific heat capacity of water is 4186 J kg–1 K–1 i.e. 4.186 J g–1 K–1. The so called mechanical equivalent of heat defined as the amount of work needed to produce
1 cal of heat is in fact just a conversion factor between two different units of energy : calorie to joule. Since in SI units, we use the unit joule for heat, work or any other form of energy, the t e r m m e c h a n i c a l e q u i v a l e n t i s n o w superfluous and need not be used.
As already remarked, the specific heat capacity depends on the process or the conditions under which heat capacity transfer takes place. For gases, for example, we can define two specific heats : specific heat capacity at constant volume and specific heat capacity at constant pressure. For an ideal gas, we have a simple relation.
Cp – Cv = R (11.8)
where Cp and Cv are molar specific heat capacities of an ideal gas at constant pressure and volume respectively and R is the universal gas constant. To prove the relation, we begin with Eq. (11.3) for 1 mole of the gas :
∆Q = ∆U + P ∆V
If ∆Q is absorbed at constant volume, ∆V = 0
∆ (11.9)
where the subscript v is dropped in the last step, since U of an ideal gas depends only on temperature. (The subscript denotes the quantity kept fixed.) If, on the other hand, ∆Q is absorbed at constant pressure,
∆ (11.10)
The subscript p can be dropped from the first term since U of an ideal gas depends only on T. Now, for a mole of an ideal gas which gives
 = (11.11)
Equations (11.9) to (11.11) give the desired relation, Eq. (11.8).
11.7THERMODYNAMIC STATE VARIABLES
AND EQUATION OF STATE
Every equilibrium state of a thermodynamic system is completely described by specific values of some macroscopic variables, also called state variables. For example, an equilibrium state of a gas is completely specified by the values of pressure, volume, temperature, and mass (and composition if there is a mixture of gases). A thermodynamic system is not always in equilibrium. For example, a gas allowed to expand freely against vacuum is not an equilibrium state [Fig. 11.6(a)]. During the rapid expansion, pressure of the gas may
Reprint 2026-27
THERMODYNAMICS 233 not be uniform throughout. Similarly, a mixture of gases undergoing an explosive chemical reaction (e.g. a mixture of petrol vapour and air when ignited by a spark) is not an equilibrium state; again its temperature and pressure are not uniform [Fig. 11.6(b)].
Eventually, the gas attains a uniform temperature and pressure and comes to thermal and mechanical equilibrium with its surroundings.
Fig. 11.6 (a) The partition in the box is suddenly removed leading to free expansion of the gas. (b) A mixture of gases undergoing an explosive chemical reaction. In both situations, the gas is not in equilibrium and cannot be described by state variables.
In short, thermodynamic state variables describe equilibrium states of systems. The various state variables are not necessarily independent. The connection between the state variables is called the equation of state. For example, for an ideal gas, the equation of state is the ideal gas relation
For a fixed amount of the gas i.e. given μ, there are thus, only two independent variables, say P and V or T and V. The pressure-volume curve for a fixed temperature is called an isotherm.
Real gases may have more complicated equations of state.
The thermodynamic state variables are of two kinds: extensive and intensive. Extensive variables indicate the ‘size’ of the system.
Intensive variables such as pressure and temperature do not. To decide which variable is extensive and which intensive, think of a relevant system in equilibrium, and imagine that it is divided into two equal parts. The variables that remain unchanged for each part are intensive. The variables whose values get halved in each part are extensive. It is easily seen, for example, that internal energy U, volume V, total mass M are extensive variables. Pressure P, temperature T, and density ρ are intensive variables. It is a good practice to check the consistency of thermodynamic equations using this classification of variables. For example, in the equation
∆Q = ∆U + P ∆V quantities on both sides are extensive*. (The product of an intensive variable like P and an extensive quantity ∆V is extensive.)
11.8 THERMODYNAMIC PROCESSES
11.8.1 Quasi-static process
Consider a gas in thermal and mechanical equilibrium with its surroundings. The pressure of the gas in that case equals the external pressure and its temperature is the same as that of its surroundings. Suppose that the external pressure is suddenly reduced (say by lifting the weight on the movable piston in the container). The piston will accelerate outward.
During the process, the gas passes through states that are not equilibrium states. The non- equilibrium states do not have well-defined pressure and temperature. In the same way, if a finite temperature difference exists between the gas and its surroundings, there will be a rapid exchange of heat during which the gas will pass through non-equilibrium states. In due course, the gas will settle to an equilibrium state with well-defined temperature and pressure equal to those of the surroundings. The free expansion of a gas in vacuum and a mixture of gases undergoing an explosive chemical reaction, mentioned in section 11.7 are also examples where the system goes through non- equilibrium states.
Non-equilibrium states of a system are difficult to deal with. It is, therefore, convenient to imagine an idealised process in which at every stage the system is an equilibrium state. Such a
* As emphasised earlier, Q is not a state variable. However,
∆Q is clearly proportional to the total mass of system and hence is extensive.
Reprint 2026-27
PHYSICS 234 process is, in principle, infinitely slow, hence the name quasi-static (meaning nearly static). The system changes its variables (P, T, V ) so slowly that it remains in thermal and mechanical equilibrium with its surroundings throughout.
In a quasi-static process, at every stage, the difference in the pressure of the system and the external pressure is infinitesimally
