IntroductIon
In the present time, a thorough knowledge of language with communication skills is very important in any occupation or business. As a student, you may study any language, but it is important that you are able to read, write, speak and listen well in order to communicate properly.
Speaking more than one language can help you to communicate well with people around the world. Learning English can help you to communicate with people who understand English besides the mother tongue i.e., the language one has been exposed to since birth.
S eSSIon 1: MethodS of coMMunIcatIon
The word ‘communication’ comes from the Latin word commūnicāre, meaning ‘to share’.
Being able to communicate effectively is one of the most important life skills. Communication skills are
Unit Unit
Communication
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS X 2 needed to communicate effectively with people and customers. This module aims to help you improve your communication skills.
Clear and concise communication is of immense importance in work and business environment as there are several parties involved. Various stakeholders, like, customers, employees, vendors, media, etc., are always sending important information to each other.
Communication has three important parts:
1. Transmitting — The sender transmits the message through one medium or another.
2. Listening — The receiver listens or understands the message.
3. Feedback — The receiver conveys their understanding of the message to the sender in the form of feedback to complete the communication
Let us look at an example below in an outlet of a bookstore:
Customer (to a retail associate): Do you have the textbook of Beauty Therapist, published by National
Council of Educational Research and Training?
Salesperson : Let me check.
In the above conversation, the information is being transmitted orally by the customer. The salesperson is the listener in this case. The discussion about book is the message.
Salesperson: Yes, we have the textbook of Beauty
Therapist.
Customer: Please give me one copy of the textbook.
I want to purchase it.
In the above conversation, the receiver’s response (i.e., the salesperson) is the feedback. This is an example of a communication between the customer and the salesperson.
The process of conveying a message is complete only when the person receiving it has understood the message in its entirety. In this case, the customer understood that the book store has the textbook and they can get a copy of the same.
CommuniCation S killS 3
Communication Process and Elements
Let us see the process of communication in detail.
Messenger
Recepient
Fig. 1.1: Communication Process
Behaviour/
Information/
I understand
Coding De-coding
The Channel— speaking, writing graphic, video, etc.
At least some code in common
The Message
Sender sends a
Receiver replies to the
Message is received by the receiver
A Channel is used to transfer the message
Communication starts with (Encoding) channel
Reply to Sender (Encoding)
Giving Information
Receiving Information
Receiver Sender
Figure 1.2: Elements of Communication
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS X 4
The various elements of a communication cycle are:
Sender: the person beginning the communication.
Message: the information that the sender wants to
Channel: the means by which the information is sent.
Receiver: the person to whom the message is sent.
Feedback: the receiver’s acknowledgement and response to the message.
We are constantly use some form of communication or another to send a message across. Without the different methods of communication available today, it would be challenging to carry out business as proficiently as it is done today and with the same swiftness. Some common methods of communication are given in Table 1.1.
Table 1.1: Methods of Communication
Method Description Pictorial Description
Face-to-face informal communication
There is nothing better than face-to-face communication. It helps the message to be understood clearly and quickly.
Also, since body language can be seen in this case; it adds to the effectiveness of the communication.
e-mail e-mail can be used to communicate quickly with one or many individuals in various locations. It offers flexibility, convenience and low-cost.
Notices/Posters It is effective when the same message has to go out to a large group of people. Generally used for where email communication may not be effective.
For example, ‘Change in the lunch time for factory worker,’ or ‘XYZ Clothing will remain closed for customers on
Sunday.’
Business Meetings Communication during business meetings at an organisation are generally addressed to a group of people. It can be related to business, management and organisational decisions.
CommuniCation S killS 5
Other Methods There can be various other methods like social networks, message, phone call for communication, newsletter, blog, etc.
Choosing the right method of communication depends on
• target audience
• kind/type of information
• urgency/priority
The methods of communication you choose could affect your relationship with peers, supervisors and customers.
It is, therefore, vital that you spend considerable time and consider all factors choosing the right methods to aid you in your tasks.
Practical Exercises
The teacher will facilitate these activities by showing you the e-learning lesson at http://www.psscive.ac.in/stud_text_book.
html. This will include videos and e-content for the above topics as well as detailed instructions for some activities below.
Initial Thinking Activity
After watching the initial video in the e-learning lesson for this topic, write the answer of the following question: Why is it important to communicate effectively?
Activity 1
Role Play on Communication
Procedure
• Form groups with four students in each group.
• The situation is that a student is Sales Executive at a toy store and he or she is supposed to communicate to customers about the various types of toys available with the store for different age group.
• The other students will reach the Sales Executive one by one and ask different types of questions related to toys.
• Develop a script for the role play and act on the same.
• Discuss what you all learned from this activity.
