E mployability SkillS – ClaSS X 6
Activity 2
Identifying Elements of the Communication Cycle in Activity 1
Material required
Paper and pencil
Procedure
• Each student will draw a communication cycle.
• The entire class will then discuss how each element affected communication during Activity 1.
Check Your Progress
A. Multiple choice questions
Read the questions carefully and circle the letter(s) (a), (b), (c) or (d) that best answer(s) the question. (Note: There can be more than one correct choice)
1. Which of the following is NOT an element of communication within the communication process cycle?
(a) Channel (b) Receiver (c) Sender (d) Time
2. You need to apply leave at work? Which method of communication will you use?
(a) e-mail (b) Poster (c) Newsletter (d) Blog
3. By which action can senders send their messages?
(a) Gestures (b) Speaking (c) Reading (d) Writing
B. Subjective question
1. Make a chart highlighting all the methods of communication. Use markers and colours to highlight differences amongst all.
What Have You Learnt?
After this session, you will be able to
• identify the different communication elements.
• explain the communication process along with all the communication elements.
• list the various methods of communication.
CommuniCation S killS 7
S eSSIon 2: Verbal coMMunIcatIon
Verbal communication includes sounds, words, language, and speech. Speaking is one of the most effective and commonly used way of communicating. It helps in expressing our emotions in words. By improving your verbal communication skills you will build rapport, and have a better connect. Table 1.2 lists the important forms of verbal communication.
Table 1.2: Verbal Communication
Type of Verbal
Communication
Examples
Interpersonal
Communication
This form of communication takes place between two individuals and is thus a one-on-one conversation. It can be formal or informal.
Examples
1. A manager discussing the performance with an employee.
2. Two friends discussing homework.
3. Two people talking to each other over phone or video call.
Written Communication This form of communication involves writing words. It can be letters, circulars, reports, manuals,
SMS, social media chats, etc. It can be between two or more people.
Examples
1. A manager writing an appreciation e-mail to an employee.
2. Writing a letter to grandmother enquiring about health.
Small Group
Communication
This type of communication takes place when there are more than two people involved. Each participant can interact and converse with the rest.
Examples
1. Press conferences
2. Board meetings
3. Team meetings
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS X 8
Public Communication This type of communication takes place when one individual addresses a large gathering.
Examples
1. Election campaigns
2. Public speeches by dignitaries
Advantages of Verbal Communication
It is an easy mode of communication in which you can exchange ideas by saying what you want and get a quick response. Verbal communication also enables you to keep changing your interaction as per the other person’s response.
Disadvantages of Verbal Communication
Since verbal communication depends on written or spoken words, sometimes the meanings can be confusing and difficult to understand if the right words are not used.
Mastering Verbal Communication
Most people tend to get nervous while speaking in front of a large group, or even while speaking to their teachers, managers or supervisors. However, if you focus on the points given in Table 1.3, you can enhance and master your verbal communication skills.
Table 1.3: Mastering Verbal Communication
Think Before You
• Think about your topic.
• Think about the most effective ways to make your listeners understand the topic.
• Write or note down whatever you plan to say.
Concise and Clear • Speak clearly, loudly and at moderate speed.
• Be sure the information you want to share is to the point.
• Do not repeat the same sentences.
Confidence and
Body Language
• Be confident.
• Maintain eye contact, stand straight and be attentive.
• Be friendly.
Practical Exercise
The teacher will facilitate these activities by showing you the e-Learning lesson at http://www.psscive.ac.in/stud_text_book.
html. This will include videos and e-content for the above topics as well as detailed instructions for some activities below.
