CommuniCation S killS 19
Practical Exercise
The teacher will facilitate these activities by showing you the e-learning lesson at http://www.psscive.ac.in/stud_text_book.
html. This will include videos and e-content for the above topics as well as detailed instructions for some activities below.
Activity 1
Role Play on Providing Feedback
Material required
Notebook, pen
Procedure
• Form groups with five students in each group.
• Two volunteers in the group should act out a role play of a hotel staff. For example, Volunteer A can act as a front desk executive and Volunteer B as a guest enquiring availability of rooms.
• After the role play, remaining members of group will give constructive feedback to both the volunteers.
Activity 2
Group-Practice on Constructive Feedback
Material required
Notebook, pen
Procedure
• Form groups with five students in each group.
• Each member in the group should write down three sentences showing how feedback should NOT be given.
• Then, each group forms a circle. One person in the circle starts by saying a sentence or feedback. The next person in the circle tries to make the feedback more constructive.
• Keep repeating until all written feedback have constructive alternatives.
Check Your Progress
A. Multiple choice questions
Read the questions carefully and circle the letter (a), (b), (c) or (d) that best answers the question.
1. Which of these are examples of positive feedback?
(a) Excellent, your work has improved.
(b) I noticed your dedication towards the project.
(c) You are always doing it the wrong way.
(d) All of the above
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS X 20
2. Which of these are examples of negative feedback?
(a) I hate to tell you this but your drawing skills are poor.
(b) You can surely improve your drawing.
(c) This is a good drawing but you can do better.
(d) None of the above
3. Which of the following are effective components of a good feedback?
(a) Detailed and time consuming (b) Direct and honest (c) Specific (d) Opinion-based
B. Subjective question
1. What do you mean by feedback? Let’s take a scenario.
Radha is your co-worker. Together you are making a report on how to manage the waste in your store. Since she has not finished her part of the report on time, the whole report has got delayed and the manager has given you both a warning. Write down the feedback you would like to give your co-worker on managing time. Try to keep the feedback specific and polite.
What Have You Learnt?
After completing this session, you will able to
• identify how and when to give feedback.
• explain the importance of feedback.
• use suitable words and phrases when giving or receiving feedback.
S eSSIon 5: barrIerS to effectIVe coMMunIcatIon
What is Effective Communication?
We now know that there are different methods of communication: non-verbal, verbal and visual. However, all these methods can only be effective if we follow the basic principles of professional communication skills.
These can be abbreviated as 7 Cs i.e., Clear, Concise,
Concrete, Correct, Coherent, Complete and Courteous.
These are further explained in Figure 1.6.
Absence of any of these 7Cs can lead to miscommunication. Let us take a closer look at certain barriers to effective communication.
CommuniCation S killS 21
Linguistic Cultural
Interpersonal
Physical and
Organisational
Barriers to
Communication
Figure 1.7: Barriers to Effective Communication
Barriers to Effective Communication
Physical Barriers
Physical barrier is the environmental and natural condition that act as a barrier in communication in sending message from sender to receiver. Not being able to see gestures, posture and general body language can make communication less effective. For example, text messages are often less effective than face-to-face communication.
Linguistic Barriers
The inability to communicate using a language is known as language barrier to communication. Language barriers are the most common communication barriers, which cause misunderstandings and
Figure 1.6: 7Cs of Effective Communication
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS X 22 misinterpretations between people. For example, slang, professional jargon and regional colloquialisms can make communication difficult.
Interpersonal Barriers
Barriers to interpersonal communication occur when the sender’s message is received differently from how it was intended. It is also very difficult to communicate with someone who is not willing to talk or express their feelings and views. Stage fear, lack of will to communicate, personal differences can create interpersonal barriers to communication.
Organisational Barriers
Organisations are designed on the basis of formal hierarchical structures that follow performance standards, rules and regulations, procedures, policies, behavioural norms, etc. All these affect the free flow of communication in organisations and therefore, need to be suitably managed. Superior-subordinate relationships in a formal organisational structure can be a barrier to free flow of communication. Also, sometimes due to the stringent rules, the employees find it difficult to communicate with their peers too.
Cultural Barriers
Cultural barriers is when people of different cultures are unable to understand each other’s customs, resulting in inconveniences and difficulties.People sometimes make stereotypical assumptions about others based on their cultural background, this leads to difference in opinions and can be a major barrier to effective communication.
Although there are certain barriers to effective communication, you can always overcome these barriers by following some best practices of effective communication that are listed here.
Ways to Overcome Barriers to Effective
Communication
• Use simple language
• Do not form assumptions on culture, religion or geography
