CommuniCation S killS 23
• Try to communicate in person as much as possible
• Use visuals
• Take help of a translator to overcome differences in language
• Be respectful of other’s opinions
Practical Exercise
Activity 1
Role Play on Barriers to Effective Communication.
Material required
Notebook, pen
Procedure
• Form groups with five students in each group.
• Two volunteers from the group should act out a role play of a salesperson in a shopping mall. For example, Volunteer
A can act as a sales executive, and Volunteer B as a customer enquiring about a television set. The customer is from a foreign country.
• Enact the communication barriers or challenges the customer or salesperson may face while interacting with each other.
Activity 2
Group practice: Overcoming Barriers
Material required
Notebook, pen
Procedure
• Form groups with five students in each group.
• Each member in a group should write down three ways to overcome barriers to effective communication. The group members will then stand in a circle. Each student should say aloud one point each; till all the ways have been discussed.
Check Your Progress
A. Multiple choice questions
Read the questions carefully and circle the letter(s) (a), (b), (c) or (d) that best answers the question.
1. Which of these is NOT a common communication barrier?
(a) Linguistic barrier (b) Interpersonal barrier
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS X 24
Notes (c) Financial barrier (d) Organisational barrier
2. Which of these are ways to overcome communication barriers?
(a) Respecting each other’s differences (b) Using a translator (c) Not communicating at all (d) Using your own language for comfort
B. Subjective question
1. Write down the common communication barriers you may come across when you move to a new city or country.
What Have You Learnt?
After completing this session, you will be able to
• identify the common barriers to effective communication.
• list ways to overcome barriers to effective communication.
sessioN 6: W ritiNg skills — Parts of sPeech
Writing skills are part of verbal communication and include e-mails, letters, notes, articles, SMS/chat, blogs, etc. In all these forms of written communication, we use sentences to express ourselves. Sentences are important because they help to clearly present the message. We all know that a sentence is a group of words that communicates a complete thought. For example, Pooja goes to school. On the other hand, a group of words, which does not make complete sense, is known as a phrase. For example, Pooja goes. A sentence always begins with a capital letter, and it always ends with a question mark, full stop or exclamation mark. In this session, we will cover all these topics in detail. But first, read aloud the examples given below:
• When will you complete your homework?
• I completed it yesterday.
• That is good!
Capitalisation
We know that all sentences begin with capital letters.
However, there are certain other points in a sentence where we should use capital letters. ‘TINS’is a set of
CommuniCation S killS 25 simple rules that help you capitalise words correctly.
Each letter in the word TINS refers to one capitalisation rule as shown in Table 1.7.
Table 1.7: Capitalisation Rules
Alphabet T I N S
What it shows: Titles word ‘I’ Names Starting letter of sentences
Rule Capitalise the first letter in the titles used before people’s
Capitalise the letter ‘I’ when it is used as a word (Pronoun).
Capitalise the first letter in the names of people, places, days and months.
Capitalise the first letter in every sentence.
Example Dr Malik and
Mr Pandey were invited to the party.
He said that I should accompany him to the mall.
The summer break is starting this
Friday and will continue till the end of June. Suresh is planning to visit
London next year.
The little girl lost her book.
Punctuation
Certain set of marks, such as full stop, comma, question mark, exclamation mark and apostrophe are used in communication to separate parts of a sentence for better clarity of message. Some common punctuation marks and their rules are shown here in Table 1.8.
Table 1.8: Punctuation Marks
Punctuation
Sign Use Example
Full stop . • Used at the end of a sentence.
• Used with short form of long words.
Omar is a professor. His students call him Prof. Omar.
Comma , • Used to indicate a pause in the sentence.
• Used to separate two or more items in a row.
After getting down from the bus, I walked towards my school.
The grocery store had fresh kiwis,strawberries and mangoes.
Question mark ? • Used at the end of a question.
Where is your book?
Exclamation mark ! • Used at the end of a word or a sentence to indicate a strong feeling.
What a beautiful dress!
Hooray! We won the match.
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS X 26
Apostrophe (‘) • Used followed by an ‘s’ to show possession or belonging.
• Used with shortened form of words in informal speech.
That is Shobha’s cat.
Are these Rahim’s colour pencils?
Let’s go for the movies today.
She isn’t coming to school today.
Basic Parts of Speech
The part of speech indicates how a particular word functions in meaning as well as grammatically within the sentence. Some examples are nouns, pronouns, adjectives, verbs and adverbs as shown in Figure 1.8.
(Name, Place,
Animal, Thing)
(slowly, quickly, etc.)
Pronouns (He, she,
Verbs (Walk,
Talk, etc.)
Adjectives (Salty, Spicy,
Figure 1.8: Parts of Speech
Table 1.8: Parts of Speech
Parts of
What they do Example sentence Example
Noun Words (naming words)
that refer to a person, place, thing or idea.
Kavita bought a book. ‘Kavita’ and ‘book’ are nouns.
Pronoun Words used in place of
Kavita bought a book. She has a great book collection. ‘She’ is used in place of the noun Kavita.
CommuniCation S killS 27
Adjectives Words that describe other words.
Kavita bought a best-selling book best-selling is an adjective that describes the noun book.
One-foot
Verbs Words that show action Kavita buys a new book every month. Buys is the verb that tells about Kavita’s actions.
Adverbs Words that add meaning to verbs by answering
How? How often? When?
and Where?
Kavita quickly read her book.‘Quickly’ tells us how Kavita did the action.
Carefully
Let us now see how these words are used. Read aloud the sentence given below.
Hooray! Shyam and his team won the exciting match yesterday.
We already know that Shyam, team and match are nouns. ‘Exciting’ is an adjective here because it describes the noun match, the word won is a verb because its hows an action and the word ‘yesterday’ is an adverb because it describes when they won the match.
But what about the remaining words in this sentence:
Hooray, the, and? Such supporting words are used to join the main parts of speech together and also to add information to the sentences. Let us now look at some types of these supporting words.
Supporting Parts of Speech Types
Interjection (wow, oh no,
Conjunctions (and, but, etc.)
Articles (a, an, the)
Preposition (in, on, etc.)
Figure 1.9: Supporting Parts of Speech
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS X 28
Some supporting words are shown in Figure 1.9. Let us learn more about them using Table 1.10.
Table 1.10: Supporting Parts of Speech
Supporting Parts of Speech
Use Example
Articles (a, an, the) Generally used before nouns.
An — used before words with a vowel sound
A — used before nouns with a consonant
The — Refers to specific or particular words
Wow! The boy was taken by surprise because he saw a bird flying over his head.
Conjunctions (and, but, because)
Joins two nouns, phrases or sentences Wow! The boy was taken by surprise because he saw a bird flying over his head.
Prepositions (on, over, in, under)
Connects one word with another to usually answer the questions ‘where’,
‘when’ and ‘how’.
Wow! The boy was taken by surprise because he saw a bird flying over his head.
Interjections (Wow!, Help!)
Expresses strong emotions, such as happiness, surprise, anger or pain.
Wow! The boy was taken by surprise because he saw a bird flying over his head.
Practical Exercise
The teacher will facilitate these activities – by showing you the e-learning lesson at http://www.psscive.ac.in/stud_text_book.
html. This will include videos and e-content for the above topics as well as detailed instructions for some activities below.
Initial Thinking Activity
After watching the initial video in the e-learning lesson for this topic, write down what do you think was wrong with
Seema’s letter?
Activity 1
Identifying Parts of Speech
Material required
Notebook, pen
Procedure
• Form groups with five students in each group.
• In the paragraph given below (taken from from ‘La Bamba’— a short story; Gary Soto pp. 115), identify the different parts of speech and write them down accordingly.
“manuel walked on stage and the song started immediately glassy-eyed from the shock of being in front of so many
CommuniCation S killS 29 people manuel moved his lips and swayed in a made-up dance step he couldn’t see his parents but he could see his brother mario who was a year younger thumb-wrestling with a friend mario was wearing manuel’s favourite shirt he would deal with Mario later. He saw some other kids get up and head for the drinking fountain and a baby sitting in the middle of an aisle sucking her thumb and watching him intently.”
• This paragraph contains examples of the parts of speech you learnt about in this lesson.
• Identify as many of these parts of speech as you can and mark them. Discuss what was difficult in this activity.
• Write the paragraph with correct capitalisation and punctuation. One of the groups will volunteer and present to the class what they have marked. They write out the paragraph on the board with proper punctuation. The other students will share if it is correct.
Activity 2
Pair Activity: Sentence Construction
Material required
Notebook, pen
Procedure
• Form pairs of students.
• List out nine parts of speech that you learnt in the lesson.
Select any three of them and create five simple sentences which use these parts of speech.
• For each part of speech, a volunteer reads out their sentences. The other students share if it is correct.
Activity 3
Group Practice: Identify Name, Place, Animal, Thing
Material required
Notepad and pens
Procedure
• Number yourselves from 1 to 5.
• One set of 1–5 is in one group and so on.
• Each member of a group has to say a word that is either a name, place, animal, thing or feeling; the fifth member has to perform any kind of action.
• Each group gets 30 seconds to think what they are going to say and do.
Discussion
The class discussion will highlight different words that are used to name a person, place, animal, thing, or feeling and their role in a sentence as parts of speech. The discussion will also highlight the role of action words as parts of speech
