E mployability SkillS – ClaSS X 50
Five things I really enjoy doing
Three things I like to do every day
I am most passionate about
Ideas or issues I care deeply
If I had the talent or ability,
If I could choose any job, it would be
The three activities that
I love to do?
How often do I do them?
What stops me from doing the activities more often?
What specific changes do
I need to make in order to engage in these activities more frequently?
Check Your Progress
1. Fill in the table given below to prepare an action plan to build upon your strengths and overcome your weaknesses.
Strengths Weakness Action plan to build upon your strengths and overcome your weaknesses
What Have You Learnt?
After completing this session, you will be able to
• identify your own strengths and weaknesses.
• explain how to build on your strengths and overcome your weaknesses.
• identify your interests.
S elf -management SkillS 51
S eSSIon 3: Self -MotIvatIon
Have you heard of the story of the hare and tortoise?
Who won that race in spite of being slow? The tortoise.
They key to win was that the tortoise never thought less of itself and stayed motivated even though it was lagging behind. But slowly and gradually it crossed all hurdles and continued the race without being demotivated.
Self-motivation is simply the force within you that drives you to do things. Self-motivation is what pushes us to achieve our goals, feel happy and improve our quality of life. In other words, it is our ability to do the things that need to be done without someone or something influencing us.
Here are some examples of self-motivation.
Different people are motivated by different things and at different times in their lives.
Types of Motivation
Figure 2.7 Self-motivation
Rekha gets up at 5 am and goes for her dance classes. Then she comes home and finishes her hoemwork before going to school.
She does this all by herself. No one tells her to do it.
Neha spends all her after-school hours to practice more and more sample question papers. She wants to do well in her exams so that she can get admission in her dream college in the city.
Internal Motivation: LOVE
We do things because they make us happy, healthy and feel good. For example, when you perform on your annual day function and you learn something new, such as dancing, singing, etc., you feel good.
External Motivation: REWARD
We do things because they give us respect, recognition and appreciation. For example, Suresh participated in a 100m race and won a prize. This motivated him to go for practice every morning.
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS X 52
Qualities of Self-motivated People
There are some typical behaviours seen in self-motivated people which are as given below.
Mr E Shreedharan, Former Managing Director, Delhi
Metro Rail Corporation Ltd, was a self-motivated and energetic person. With his dedication and respect for others, he motivated his team to work hard and achieve results.
Mahashay Dharmapal Gulati, the founder of
Mahashian Di Hatti (MDH) Private Limited started with a small shop in Karol Bagh but with his focus, dedication and clear ideas, MDH (Spice Company) became one of the most popular brands in India besides having a good reputation all over the world.
Building Self-motivation
There are four steps for building self-motivation, which are as given below.
Know what they want from life
Know what is important
Are dedicated to fulfill their dreams
Are focussed
Figure 2.8: Qualities of self-motivated people
Identify your likes and dislikes.
Understand what makes you happy.
For example, I love cooking.
Find out your strengths
Define the goals you want to achieve and focus all your energy to achieve your goal. For example, I want to be a chef.
Set and focus on your goals
Plan and set timelines to achieve your goals,
Plan a list of activities that you will do to achieve each goal. For example, after schooling, you may be required to appear for a competitive examination to join Hotel
Management Institute.
Develop a plan to achieve your goals
Work towards achieving your goal, even when you are facing difficult time.
For example, even though I did not clear the Hotel Management entrance exam, I will find out other ways to become a chef.
Stay loyal to your goals
Figure 2.9: Building self-motivation
