S elf -management SkillS 57
Activity 1
SMART Goal or Not (Group Work)
Materials required
Pen, notepad or sheets of paper
Procedure
• Indicate whether the below mentioned goals are SMART or not. If they are SMART goals then tick mark against each aspect of SMART.
Goals Specific
Measurable (Yes or No)
Achievable (Yes or No)
Realistic
I want to earn INR 1 crore in my first job.
I want to a teacher after my graduation.
to travel
Activity 2
Long-term Goals and Short-term Goals (Peer Feedback)
Material required
Pen, notepad or sheets of paper
Procedure
• Form groups of four. Work individually in your group and complete the below table. Once completed, share with your group and seek feedback on your goals. Share your feedback when other members of the groups are presenting their goals.
Short-term Goals (What are your goals in the next 6 months to 2 years?)
Long-term Goals (What are your goals in the next 5
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS X 58
Activity 3
Self Reflection
Material required
Pen or pencil
Procedure
• Complete the table below by writing how you will make sure that the goals you set for yourself are SMART. Use the tips shared in the lesson for doing this.
SMART Goals How will make sure the goals are SMART
Specific
Measurable
Achievable
Realistic
Time-bound
Check Your Progress
A. Subjective questions
1. What is Goal Setting?
2. In SMART goals, what does ‘S’ stand for? Explain.
3. What is the best way to work on long-term goals?
What Have You Learnt?
After completing this session, you will be able to
• explain the meaning of ‘Goal Setting.’
• identify the benefits of ‘Goal Setting.’
• create short-term and long-term goals using
SMART method.
S eSSIon 5: Self -regulatIon — tIMe
ManageMent
Time Management and Its Importance
Sameer was a very lazy boy and always used to postpone things. His father tried to make him understand the value of time. Sameer promised his father that he would never postpone his tasks. One day, he won the first prize in a singing competition. He was asked to collect the
S elf -management SkillS 59 prize the same day. He didn’t care and went to collect the prize the next day. But the prize was now useless for him, as it was a ticket to a circus show for the previous day. That day Sameer learnt an important lesson — the importance of doing things on time.
Time management is the ability to plan and control how you spend the hours of your day well and do all that you want to do. An example of good time management skills would be when you decide to finish your homework immediately after school so you have time to watch
TV later in the evening.
Example and Non-example of Time
Management
Time management is the thinking skill that helps
• complete tasks on time.
• make a daily timetable.
• make a good guess at how long it will take you to do something.
• submit homework and assignments on time.
• not waste time during the day.
Sameera is always punctual at school. She has a regular schedule that she follows everyday. She plans for study and play time in advance.
Nisha usually arrives late to work.
She does not submit her assignments on time. She sometimes gets carried away in certain activities and forgets the main tasks in hand.
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS X 60
Four Steps for Effective Time Management
Organise
• We plan our day- to-day activities.
• We make a timetable that we
• We keep our surroundings and study table clean and mess free.
• We put things back where they belong.
• It helps us save
Pritortise
• We make a to-do list that has all our activities and we rank them in the order of importance.
For example, you may rank doing homework as the most important task.
It helps us to get the most important task done first and also to track what is pending.
• We have a control over our activities and
• We avoid time wasters like chatting on the phone, surfing gossip sites, etc., and focus on more important
• We identify and note where we have spent our time. This will help us analyse if we have used our time effectively or not. It also helps us to identify time-wasting activities
Tips for Practicing the Four Steps for
Effective Time Management
• Avoid delay or postponing any planned activity
• Organise your room and school desk
• Develop a ‘NO DISTURBANCE ZONE’, where you can sit and complete important tasks
• Use waiting time productively
• Prepare a ‘To-do’ list
• Prioritise
• Replace useless activities with productive activities
Practical Exercise
The teacher will facilitate these activities by showing you the e-learning module for this lesson via http://www.psscive.ac.in/
Employability_Skills.html. The module will include videos and e-content for the above topics as well as detailed instructions for some activities given below.
After watching the video ‘ Time Management’ in the e-learning lesson, discuss — What you have learnt from the video? Which steps of time management were followed in the video?
S elf -management SkillS 61
Activity 1
Pair Work : Making a List of Activities
Material required
Pen, notepad or sheets of paper
Procedure
• Form groups of two. Complete the below table with a list of activities that you do on a daily basis. Remember to include in the list, every small activity that you do.
• The next step would be to group them into three types
‘Must Do’, ‘Should Do’ and ‘Nice to Do’.
• Use a tick mark to indicate the group. An example is given below.
• Once completed share with your partner and discuss each other’s table.
Activities (Urgent and
Important
Should Do (Important
Nice to Do (Not
Urgent and Not
Important)
Complete
Homework 
Chat with friends 
Book movie tickets for tomorrow
Activity 2
Managing your time to reach school on time
Material required
Procedure
• List out the to-do plan with timing to make sure you reach school on time.
To-do List
Check Your Progress
A. Subjective questions
1. What is time management and how can you manage your time?
2. How can tracking your time help you?
