IntroductIon
Entrepreneurship is being talked about a lot in the world today, and especially in India. Entrepreneurship is the type of self-employment where one is running a business to satisfy the needs of people and looking for ways to make the business better to make profits. This unit focusses on encouraging students to learn about entrepreneurship and its functions from the world around them.
Entrepreneurs are all around us. We would have spoken to a lot of them through the course of this module. We also learnt that successful entrepreneurs have the following qualities.
• They are confident. They believe in themselves and their abilities.
• They keep trying new ideas in their business.
• They are patient.
• They are creative and think differently about business ideas.
• They take responsibility for their actions.
• They take decisions after thinking about them.
• They work hard.
• They do not give up when they face a difficulty.
Unit Unit
Entrepreneurial
E ntrEprEnEurial SkillS 85
S eSSIon 1: entrepreneurShIp and SocIety
We learnt last year that the two ways in which one can earn a living are through wage employment and self-employment. Wage employed people are people who work for a person or an organization and get paid for that work. Self-employed people are those who start businesses to satisfy the needs of people. A self- employed person who is always trying to make his/her business better by taking risks and trying new ideas is an entrepreneur.
Example: Ramya and Ramu both own plant shops.
Ramu sits at his shop every day. When customers come, he sells to them. Ramya walks around and gets customers to her shop. She also sells seeds and flowers with her plants.
Ramya is working to do more and grow her business.
She has also added a different idea to her business. So,
Ramya is an entrepreneur and Ramu is a businessman.
Practical Exercise
Activity 1
Entrepreneurs I know: Individual Practice
Procedure
• In this activity, we will think of the entrepreneurs we know.
Instructions
1. Think of 4 entrepreneurs whom you know or have seen.
2. Draw circles and in each circle write the name of that entrepreneur, what business they run, and one thing that you really like about their business.
3. After writing, share the details of the entrepreneurs with your class.
You have identified entrepreneurs around you.
Where do these entrepreneurs do their business?
Entrepreneurs run their businesses in a market.
The market has people who buy products and services and people who sell them also. When people are buying and selling from each other, it is helpful for everyone because everyone involved makes money. This is how entrepreneurs help in growing the area and society they live in.
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS X 86
Aditi has a store where she sells different types of shampoos. She has many customers. She buys the shampoos in large quantities from a woman.
There are two men who work in the store to help her sell.
Aditi is helping people in her area to make money. She is also increasing jobs in her area.
Aditi is helping the people in the society around her to live better.
So, what do entrepreneurs do when they run their business?
Fulfil Customer Needs
Demand means a product or service that people want.
Entrepreneurs find out what people want. Then, they use their creativity to come up with a business idea that will meet that demand.
Use Local Materials
Entrepreneurs use the material and people available around them, to make products at low cost.
Help Society
Entrepreneurs have a positive relationship with society.
They make profits through activities that benefit society. Some entrepreneurs work towards saving the environment, some give money to build schools and hospitals. This way, the people and area around them becomes better.
These are the roles that entrepreneurs do in a society.
How do you think entrepreneurs affect the society they live in? Let’s read.
Create Jobs
With the growth of a business, entrepreneurs look for more people to help them. They buy more material, and from more people. The also hire more people to work for them. In this way, more people have jobs.
Sharing of Wealth
Wealth means having enough money to live a comfortable life. As entrepreneurs grow their business, the people
Figure 4.1: Customer needs, wants and demands
E ntrEprEnEurial SkillS 87 working for them and in related businesses also grow.
Hey have more money to live a better quality life.
Lower Price of Products
As more entrepreneurs sell the same product, the price of the product goes down. For example, when more mobile phones were getting sold in India, the cost of the phone became lesser.
Let’s learn about the role of entrepreneurs in society by reading Bharti’s story.
Bharti, the Jewellery Queen
Bharti is a young woman from Bihar. Many girls in her area like to wear earrings. She buys jute from a farmer and makes earrings from that. Her business is called
Manavi Natural Handicrafts. She sees that most women in her village do not work. So, she hires two women to help her. As her orders increase, she buys more jute.
She hires three more women to work for her. The farmer, and the women working for her now earn more money.
They are able to save money for their future.
Do you think Bharti is an entrepreneur? Read her story and tick the correct answer for each question in
Table 4.1
Questions about Bharti’s business Answers
What demand did Bharti identify in her village?
(a) People in her village wanted Jute (b) Girls in her area liked to wear earrings (c) The villagers wanted more water
What is the local resource that Bharti (a) Jute (b) Water (c) Sand
How is Bharti helping her village grow? Options (a) By buying jute from the local farmer who can now earn more money (b) By providing jobs to local women (c) Both (a) and (b)
How was she creating more jobs? Options (a) By selling earrings to women without a job (b) By buying jute from the local farmer (c) By providing jobs to local women
