E mployability SkillS – ClaSS X 88 noteS We’ve read how entrepreneurs help in the growth of the society around them. Let’s try it out ourselves now!
Practical Exercise
Activity 2
Field Work : Let’s be an Entrepreneur
Procedure
• In this activity, students will find problems on their school campus that can be turned into business opportunities.
Instructions
1. Form groups of 3 each.
2. Take 30 minutes to go around your school.
3. Note down 2–3 problems you see on your school campus.
4. Write down some business ideas to solve these problems in the table given below.
5. Also think about how your business ideas will help the school. One example has been written for you.
Problem Business ideas How will this help the
For example, plastic cola from the canteen are harming the environment
1. Make plant pots out of bottles and sell to students and parents.
2. Sell cola in glass bottles.
1. The school will look green and beautiful.
The air will be fresh.
2. The canteen owner will spend less money on buying glass bottles because they can be used again.
Check Your Progress
A. State whether the following statements are True or False
1. Entrepreneurs can create jobs in the market.
2. When many entrepreneurs sell mobile phones in a market, the prices of phones increase.
3. Entrepreneurs identify a need in the market and build a product or service for it.
E ntrEprEnEurial SkillS 89
S eSSIon 2: QualItIeS and F unctIonS oF an entrepreneur
In the previous section, we read how entrepreneurs help in the growth of the world around them. To help society, how do they think and behave?
Qualities of an Entrepreneur
Quality is a way in which a person acts or behaves.
Some examples of qualities in people are hardworking, nice, rude, etc. Read the comic strips in Figures 4.2 and
4.3 and learn about the qualities of an entrepreneur.
B. Subjective question
1. List the ways in which an entrepreneur affects a society.
What Have You Learnt?
After completing this session, you will be able to
• identify the role of entrepreneurs and how they help in the growth of society.
Qualities of an Entrepreneur
Oh! That idea did not work. But, it is okay. I
Keep TRYING NEW
Running my business is difficult. But, I am PATIENT because I know success will come soon.
You must believe in yourself.
You should be CONFIDENT and take business decision
I had a CREATIVE and different solution to the problem — that is why I am successful!
Figure 4.2
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS X 90
The Story of Zafar
Oops! I made a mistake. But, it was my decision. so, I Take
RESPONSIBILITY for it. I will work to make it better
Sometimes, I have so many problems.
But, I DO NOT GIVE UP. I stay positive because everything will be fine.
I am working so many hours,
Sundays also. But, I WORK
HARD because it is good for the company.
I take DECISIONS AFTER
THINKING about whether they are good or bad for my business.
Figure 4.3
We’ve read about the qualities of successful entrepreneurs. Let us find what the entrepreneurial qualities that we have!
Practical Exercise
Activity 1
My Entrepreneurial Qualities: Self-assessment
Procedure
• In this activity, the students will rate themselves on the entrepreneurial qualities mentioned below.
Figure A
I believe in myself and what I can do. I am confident.
Problems take time to get solved.
I am patient about solving them.
I take responsibility for my actions and mistakes.
I work hard on every task.
I keep trying new ideas.
I think of different ways to solve a problem. I am creative.
I think before I make a decision.
I do not give up when I face a problem.
E ntrEprEnEurial SkillS 91
Instructions
1. Listed in Figure A are all the qualities of successful entrepreneurs.
2. Think about yourself. Mark yes or no against each quality.
3. Give yourself a point for every ‘yes’ answer.
Debrief questions
1. Look at how many ‘yes’ you have. You are good at these things. Can you be better at these? How?
2. Look at the ‘no’ statements. What can you do to learn these qualities?
Activity 2
Let us Solve a Problem!
Procedure
• In this activity, students will try and solve a problem in their vicinity.
Instructions
1. Similar to Activity 1.2, select a problem in the area near your home. This could be a problem that really bothers you.
2. Make a 5-step plan for how you will solve the problem.
3. Implement step 1 of your solution!
4. After that, try implementing all the steps. Try your solution for a week.
5. At the end of the week, rate yourself again on the entrepreneurial qualities you rated yourselves on in
Activity 2.2.
Questions for Discussion
Are your ratings on your entrepreneurial qualities before doing the activity and after doing the activity different?
What qualities did you see yourself apply in the activity? You would have applied some or all of these entrepreneurial qualities while implementing your solution. You did not implement a business solution, but you exercised these qualities anyway.
These are ideal qualities than an entrepreneur has.
However, any individual who is trying to solve a problem can be entrepreneurial. If employees of a factory or company work hard to try new ideas to make their company’s products better or find creative ways to get work done, they are also showing the qualities of an entrepreneur. They are also being entrepreneurial.
If your mother or father work in a company, ask them if they show these qualities.
Functions of an Entrepreneur
If you were to become an entrepreneur, you now know how you would think and act. But, what would you actually be doing in your business? What work will you do every day? Let’s find out.
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS X 92 noteS Activity 3
Interview an entrepreneur
Procedure
• In this activity, students will observe entrepreneurs at work, and speak to them and their employees about their work.
Instructions
1. Identify an entrepreneur in your area that you like or know.
2. On a weekend, spend some time in their shop and note everything that they do.
3. After that, speak to the entrepreneur and ask them in detail what activities they do in a day.
4. Also speak to somebody who works for them. Ask them what activities they see the entrepreneur do in a day.
Write all your notes in Figure a.
5. After you are back in class, make a list of all the actions you listed with your teacher. Compare your list with the list of your friends. Notice how many actions get repeated.
Figure a
Everyone in class would have spoken to different kinds of entrepreneurs. But, when you compare the responses you got to the responses your friends got, you will see that all entrepreneurs do some common activities. These activities are called functions.
Function means working in a way. Functions of an entrepreneur
