E ntrEprEnEurial SkillS 93 would be the work that an entrepreneur does. In Figure 4.8, you will read the common functions that all entrepreneurs do.
Check Your Progress
A. Here are some stories of some entrepreneurs. Tick the option for the quality they are showing.
1. Ravi’s customer comes to his store and starts shouting at him. He does not get angry. He listens to what his customer is saying. He is ____________.
(a) hardworking (b) confident (c) patient (d) prying new ideas
2. Susheela decides to sell her company tyres in Sri Lanka.
It does not sell and she has a loss. She apologises to the people who work for her. She says she will plan better next time. She _______________________.
(a) takes responsibility for your mistakes (b) thinks before making a decision (c) does not give up (d) is creative
Figure b
DECISIONS entrepreneur decisions everyday.
This includes produce or sell, how much and where to sell.
MANAGING
BUSINESS entrepreneur plans the future of his or her business.
arranges for raw material, hires people for work and tells everyone what to do.
They also check if the plan is being followed.
entrepreneur divides the business money to buy material, pays rent of the building and salaries to people.
Risk is the chance of something entrepreneur takes risks against fires, lost items and theft.
entrepreneur is always trying new does this to increase their importance and income.
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS X 94
B. Tick the correct option for the function that the entrepreneur is doing.
1. Ali has a diamond factory. He pays his employees on the
1st of every month.
(a) Creates a new product (b) Manages the business (c) Takes risk
2. Mary buys bulbs for her business from Noida. She learns that bulbs are cheaper in Faridabad. So, she decides to start buying bulbs from there.
(a) Makes decisions (b) Divides income (c) Takes risk
3. Rehnuma has two people who work for her. Every day, she spends one hour with them to learn about what they’ve done that day.
(a) Creates a new product (b) Divides income (c) Manages the business
C. Subjective question
1. What do you think is the most important function of an entrepreneur? Write your answer giving suitable examples.
What Have You Learnt?
After completing this session, you will be able to
• identify the qualities of successful entrepreneurs.
• list the functions of entrepreneurs.
S eSSIon 3: MythS about entrepreneurShIp
We know that entrepreneurs are all around us. But even now, how many of us want to be entrepreneurs ourselves? We connect entrepreneurship with some thoughts and opinions. Some people think being an entrepreneur is easy, and some people think it is difficult. Some people may even think they are not meant to be entrepreneurs.
A myth, or a misconception, is a false belief or opinion about something. For example, if we think tall people run faster than short people, we have a misconception.
It is not true. The truth is that short people can also run fast.
E ntrEprEnEurial SkillS 95 noteS In the same way, here are some misconceptions we might have about entrepreneurship. We will also read about the actual truth.
Misconception 1
The misconception is that every business idea needs to be unique or special.
The businesses mentioned in the activity above are common businesses that we see every day. But, each entrepreneur saw customer demand and brought a new idea into their business. A person can take an idea that is already there in the market and do something different with it.
Ganesh is an entrepreneur who started a car rental business. He wanted to be different from other car rental businesses. So, he thought of a new idea of adding luxury cars like Mercedes and BMW to his business.
After 10 years of being in the business, he now has 200 cars, of which 75 are luxury cars.
Practical Exercise
Activity 1
Identifying Everyday Heroes
Procedure
• In this activity, the teacher will make chits about different professions and the students will act them out. There will be a discussion after that. The professions are
1. a vegetable seller not using plastic bags
2. a businesswoman running a delivery system
3. a chai wala selling fruit flavoured tea
4. a gold seller selling gold teeth
Instructions
1. There will be professions of different people written on each chit of paper. The student reads the profession and acts it out for the class.
2. Identify what each person is doing differently in their business.
Questions for Discussion
1. Are all these people entrepreneurs? Why or why not?
2. Being a vegetable seller, selling chai or selling gold —
How many of these are new business ideas? How many of these are common business ideas?
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS X 96
Misconception 2
The misconception we have is that a person needs a lot of money to start a business.
The money used to start a business is called capital.
Capital is important for starting. However, every business does not need a lot of capital to start. In the activity, you would have seen that every entrepreneur started with a different amount. Some had a lot of money, and some did not. But, they are successful
Depending on how much money you have or can borrow, you can start a business with that much money. Once you make more money, you can put that into your business to make it bigger.
Practical Exercise
Activity 2
Talking to Entrepreneurs: Interview
Procedure
• In this activity, students speak to entrepreneurs and learn about the money needed to start a business and how to raise money needed for the business. Students should find out how the entrepreneur raised the money for their business.
Instructions
1. Identify three different types of successful entrepreneurs in your area.
2. Ask them how much money they started their businesses with.
3. What are the sources?
4. How did they raise the money?
5. Caution — not everyone likes talking about money.
Please ask your questions with respect. If someone does not want to answer, let it be!
6. Fill ‘ Table a’ after the conversation.
Entrepreneur
E.g. Kashish
Type of business Lightbulb shop
Capital ` 50,000 –
` 1,00,000
E ntrEprEnEurial SkillS 97
Year of starting 2001
How does one raise money for business?
What are the sources?
Borrow money from your family, use your own money, etc.
How did you do
I borrowed money from my family.
Question for discussion
1. Compare the amounts across the businesses. What do you see?
Misconception 3
A misconception we have is that only a person having a big business is an entrepreneur.
Sheila is 35 years old. She loved to drive. She worked hard for five years and bought a taxi for herself. She wanted to be different from other taxi drivers in the city. She said ‘hello’ to her customers. She would put that day’s newspaper in her car, for her customers to read. She had a small TV where customers could watch different channels. She also had a board with the numbers of the nearby hospitals and hotels. Because of this, customers would stand in line to take a ride in her amazing taxi!
After reading Sheila’s story, fill up Table 4.2.
Table 4.2
What was Sheila doing?
Why was she doing it?
Many of us may not call Sheila an entrepreneur because she had a taxi business. However, she was working for herself, was thinking about what her customers would want and was adding good things to her taxi. As per our definition, she is an entrepreneur.
No business is big or small. If a person is running a business to fulfill a customer need, they are an entrepreneur. Most businesses start small. It becomes big with hard work and creativity.
