E mployability SkillS – ClaSS X 98
Misconception 4
A misconception we have is that entrepreneurs are born, not made.
Before we read on, ask yourself this question — Do you think you can be an entrepreneur? Answer as yes
Practical Exercise
Activity 3
Make and sell
Procedure
• In this activity, students make an item in class and step out to sell it to someone.
Instructions
1. Form groups of 5 people each. The group should have a mix of boys and girls.
2. Look into your bags and desks and find any three items.
Put them on your desk.
3. With the materials you’ve collected, make an object.
Take 15 minutes to do this.
4. Now, take 30 minutes to sell it for money, to someone in school.
Questions for discussion
Were you able to do it? What do you now think — can you be an entrepreneur?
Sometimes, we think that only some people have the talent for doing business. An entrepreneur is a person who does whatever it takes to make the business successful. In the above activity, you did everything you could do to sell your product. So, you are already an entrepreneur!
Being an entrepreneur starts with a way of thinking.
You must believe that anything is possible and it shall be achieved. It starts with thinking of an idea that you want to work on, making it different.
There are four misconceptions we broke about entrepreneurship.
E ntrEprEnEurial SkillS 99
Check Your Progress
A. Subjective questions
1. What is the difference between a misconception and reality? Give an example.
B. Match each story below with the misconception about entrepreneurship.
Story Misconception
Ramu owns a large clothes shop. Shamu has a small store selling handmade sarees. Shamu does not call himself an entrepreneur.
(a) Every business idea needs to be unique or special.
Anna has a great idea for a website. She has ` 5,000. She is waiting for ` 20,000 more, so that she can start it.
(b) Entrepreneurs are born, not made.
In a city of thousands of tailoring shops, Gauri is a tailor who stitches good quality clothes and has a very successful business.
(c) A person needs to have a big business to be called an entrepreneur.
What Have You Learnt?
After completing this session, you will be able to
• list the misconceptions around entrepreneurship and the truth behind them.
S eSSIon 4: entrepreneurShIp aS a career optIon
So far, we have discussed the effect of entrepreneurship on society the qualities and functions of an entrepreneur and misconceptions we might have about entrepreneurship.
In this section, we shall think about entrepreneurship as a life choice.
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS X 100
A career is a line of work that a person takes for life. There are two ways a person can earn a living.
They are
1. self-employment
2. wage employment
For example, a doctor who works for a hospital is a wage employed person. If the same doctor has their own clinic, he or she is a self-employed person.
A self-employed person running a business to satisfy a need by trying new ideas is an entrepreneur.
A person who becomes an entrepreneur goes through a career process. This process is as follows:
ENTER SURVIVE GROW
When an entrepreneur is starting, they are just entering the market to do business.
There are many entrepreneurs in the market. The entrepreneur has to remain in a competitive
Once the business is stable, an entrepreneur thinks about expanding his or her business.
For example, Sanjana is starting a small grocery store in a locality.
For example, there are many other grocery stores in the area.
Yet, Sanjana’s store survives the competition and does well.
She also expands the store to two more floors.
For example, after five years, Sanjana has opened a chain of four more grocery stores in the same city. In the next two years, she plans to expand to tow other cities.
Practical Exercise
Activity 1
Talking about entrepreneurship as a life option
Procedure
• In this activity, you will compare entrepreneurship and wage employment.
Instructions
1. Get into pairs.
2. Imagine five years in the future — one person in the pair is wage employed and the other person is an entrepreneur. Discuss how your lives are similar and different from each other.
3. Have a debate with your class and your teacher.
E ntrEprEnEurial SkillS 101
Questions for Group Discussion
1. What differences did you find between entrepreneurship and wage employment as a life choice? What did you find more interesting?
Activity 1
Presenting about the Power of Entrepreneurship
Procedure
• In this activity, students shall prepare and present why they think entrepreneurship is a good life option for a person and for the society
Instructions
1. Get into groups of 5 each.
2. Imagine you believe that people should become entrepreneurs. You are speaking at your school assembly. You have to talk to the audience about the power of entrepreneurship. Prepare a presentation for the same.
3. You can use any way to present - talk, draw, act, sing, or dance.
4. You have 15 minutes to prepare. You will have 5 minutes to present.
Things to remember
1. An entrepreneur does a lot of work in his or her business. One has to learn and practice these actions before they try it out in their business. This can be done by either learning them in school and college or practicing them while working for someone.
2. If you believe in your idea, start your business.
3. Being an entrepreneur can be risky. But if you do not try, you will not know!
You have read a lot about entrepreneurship. Do you want to be an entrepreneur? Write your thoughts in the table below.
Please add your thoughts about entrepreneurship
—————————————————————————————
Go back to the exercise you went through in Session 1.
You thought of some business ideas to solve problems in your school. Take up the same problem, or identify
