E mployability SkillS – ClaSS X 102 a new one. Write down business ideas for the problem and select one business idea that you want to try out.
Do whatever it takes to run your business. Use the qualities you identified within yourself in Session 2.
Remember — if you do not try, you will not know if you want to be an entrepreneur!
Check Your Progress
A. Write against the option, if the business idea is of self-employment or wage employment.
(a) Cooking in a restaurant (b) Owning a clothing business (c) Having a dosa selling stall
B. Match the columns
1. Surabhi opens 5 painting stores across India.
a. Enter
2. There are many coaching classes in
Mumbai. Jacob owns one of them.
He is starting morning batches to attract more students to his classes.
b. Survive
3. Salma has started her clothing line on the Internet.
What Have You Learnt?
After completing this session, you will be able to
• define the meaning of a career.
• present your opinion about entrepreneurship as a life option.
IntroductIon
The environment around us affects all aspects of our life; and all our day-to-day activities also affect the environment. Those who live in cities get their food supply from surrounding villages and in turn, are dependent on forests, grasslands, rivers, seashores, for resources, such as water, fuel wood, fodder, etc. We use natural resources for food. Everything around us forms our environment and our lives depend on the natural world around us.
Over the years, with economic development, there has been an increase in environmental pollution.
For example, with the introduction of high input agriculture, we can grow more food by using fertilisers, pesticides and hybrid crops. But it has led to soil and environmental degradation. We need to plan the use of resources in a sustainable manner so that we and our future generations can enjoy the good environment
S eSSIon 1: SuStaInable development
Are we planting more trees or are we only destroying them for our use? Are we saving the water resources
Unit Unit
Green Skills
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS X 104 or just polluting them with garbage? Are we using clean energy or are we burning wood and petrol and adding to pollution? Are we giving back to nature so that our future generations may thrive or are we simply using the air, water and soil available without leaving anything for the future generations to come? If the answer to all these questions is yes, then we are only thinking about our immediate development and not the long-term development.
What is Sustainable Development?
Sustainable development is the development that satisfies the needs of the present without compromising the capacity of future generations, guaranteeing the balance between economic growth, care for the environment and social well-being.
Importance of Sustainable Development
Economic development is using up resources of the world so quickly that our future generations, the young people of the world, would have serious environmental problems, much worse than those that we are facing at present. With increasing population and income, the consumption of goods is increasing day by day. This has led to increase in production and utilisation of natural resources, which are required for producing goods.
Society must thus change its development strategy to a new form where development will not destroy the environment. This form of sustainable development can only be brought about if each individual practices a sustainable lifestyle. Since most of the natural resources are scarce, therefore, careful utilisation of resource is necessary.
Sustainable development is defined as ‘development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs’ (World Commission on Environment and Development, 1987). For example, sustainable agriculture consists of environment friendly methods of farming that allow the production of agricultural crops or livestock without damage to human or natural systems. It also involves preventing the use of
Green SkillS 105 chemicals so as to avoid adverse effects to soil, water and biodiversity.
Problems Related to Sustainable Development
Three major problems related to sustainable development are:
(a) Food: The amount of rich, fertile land needed to grow crops, such as wheat, rice, etc., is becoming less as we are using up more and more land for other purposes. Soil nutrients are also getting depleted and lots of chemicals are spoiling the soil due to use of chemical fertilisers.
(b) Water: We use fresh water from rivers and ponds for drinking and cleaning but dump garbage into them. The rivers and ponds are getting polluted.
This way after several years, we will have no clean water for our use.
(c) Fuel: We are using a lot of wood from trees as fuels and for construction of homes and furniture.
As more and more trees are being cut, it is affecting the climate of the place. Extreme weather conditions, such as floods, extreme cold or heat, are seen in many places, which affect the people living there.
An environment friendly way for production of power is using solar energy or energy from the sun which is unlimited. One major example of large scale production of solar power is seen in Charanka — Gujarat Solar
Park. This barren land with wild vegetation has a mega solar power plant of 600 MW. This has reduced the dependence on non-renewable fossil fuels in Gujarat.
The people of Charanka have benefited as they have a good source of income and this will also help future generations in the next 40–50 years to come
Sustainable development includes
• reducing excessive use of resources and enhancing resource conservation;
• recycling and reuse of waste materials;
• scientific management of renewable resources, especially bio-resources;
• planting more trees;
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS X 106
• green grassy patches and trees to be interspersed between concrete buildings;
• using more environment friendly material or biodegradable material and
• use of technologies, which are environmental friendly and based on efficient use of resources.
Sustainable Development Goals
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are a universal call of action to end poverty, protect the planet and ensure that all people enjoy peace and prosperity. The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
were launched at the United Nations Sustainable
Development Summit in New York in September 2015, forming the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
It has set targets that the countries have to should work towards and achieve by 2030.
The 17 SDGs have been made with the aim to take care of important issues facing businesses, governments and society. Some of these issues are poverty, gender equality, water use, energy, climate change and biodiversity. Countries are now making policies and regulations that will promote sustainable systems needed in all economic sectors to provide a secure, affordable and sustainable economy.
Fig. 5.1 Sustainable Development Goals
Green SkillS 107
The core skills required by a person who wants to contribute towards environment include environmental awareness and willingness to learn about sustainable development. If we are responsible about our life, then we will do our best at home, in school and at our workplace to help the environment and the people around us.
Sustainable Development Initiatives
When plastics were banned by the municipal corporation of Mangalore, an innovator and entrepreneur Mr Avasth
Hedge found an eco-friendly alternative. He made a
100 per cent bio-degradable bag which can dissolve in hot water and decompose in natural environment. This is now being used in many countries and is going to help the environment.
Another innovative idea was to stop the use of plastics spoons, forks, etc. Narayana Peesapaty made edible cutlery made out of a grain — these spoons can be eaten and even if they are not eaten they will easily decompose in the soil enriching it. <https://www.ibef.
org/Innovations-from-India.aspx>
Sustainable Processes
Some practices, such as organic farming, vermi-composting and rainwater harvesting are being used to help preserve the environment.
Organic farming is where farmers do not use chemical pesticides and fertilisers to increase their production.
They use organic and natural fertilisers, such as cow dung to help in growing crops. This helps in better quality chemical free crops while at the same time maintaining the soil quality for future use. This is a true example of sustainable developmen where we are not only using the earth resources but are also preserving it for our future generations.
Practical Exercise
Activity 1
Create a Garden in School or Plant Trees
Material required
Seeds, garden waste, sprinkler, gardening tools
