E mployability SkillS – ClaSS X 108
Procedure
• Form groups depending on the number of students available. Ask teacher to allot a piece of land in the school premises.
• Assign different tasks to different groups of students.
• The tasks can be ploughing, sowing seeds, making manure using vermicomposting and setting up a sprinkler system to water the plants.
Activity 2
Discussion on How to Prevent Wastage.
Procedure
• Form groups depending on the number of students available.
• Every student in the group will name way in which wasting of water and food can be stopped or prevented.
• Make a list and share it with the rest of the class.
Check Your Progress
A. Multiple choice questions
Read the questions carefully and circle the letter (a), (b), (c) or (d) that best answers the question.
1. How many sustainable development goals are given by the United Nations?
2. Choose the option which defines sustainable development.
(a) Taking care of future generations (b) Taking care of only ourselves (c) Taking care of ourselves and the future generations (d) Well-being of all
3. Which organisation has made the Sustainable
Development Goals.
(a) United Nations (b) League of Nations (c) UNICEF (d) World Health Organisation
B. Subjective questions
1. What is the meaning of sustainable development?
2. Why do you think the United Nations has made the 17
Sustainable Development Goals?
Green SkillS 109 noteS What Have You Learnt?
After completing this session, you will be able to
• define sustainable development.
• identify the goals of sustainable development.
S eSSIon 2: our role In SuStaInable development
Increasing population and development has led to the increase in consumption of the natural resources. The more the population, the more food, energy and water we need. When we grow more crops, the soil’s nutrients are consumed and slowly the soil becomes unusable.
Similarly, is we continue to use fossil fuels, such as coal, oil and natural gas, very soon we will run out of these natural resources.
We use so many resources from nature but what do we give back to nature? Factories give out smoke that pollutes the air. Garbage collected from homes is dumped into landfills. Untreated garbage can lead to disease and unhealthy environment. Sewage from the cities is dumped into the seas and lakes making it unsafe for marine life. This shows that though we are using the natural resources, we are doing nothing to return or give back to nature. Natural resources are limited and with time they will get over and if we do not do anything about it, our future generations will not be able to survive.
One initiative was taken by Ministry of Railways in
Varanasi and Raibareilly where they introduced clay pots ‘Kulhads’ to replace plastic and paper cups and to bring back taste of tradition. Three major advantages gained by using ‘Kulhads’ are to
1. reduce cutting of tree for making paper cups.
2. job creation for potters, which contributes to economy.
3. reduce plastic waste.
Our Role towards Sustainable Development
United Nations has formed 17 Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) so that countries and nations can work
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS X 110 towards finding a solution to the growing problems in the world. Countries should form rules and guidelines to remove poverty and hunger and provide good health and quality education. These goals have been made so that all the nations take action to protect our air, water and land from pollution and provide clean water, air and energy to all people.
Sustainable development can actually happen only when each one of us works towards it. We have to become responsible environment citizens who can protect the environment through our own efforts.
Here are some basic ways in which people can help towards Sustainable Development Goals.
Quality Education
Education is the most important factors for sustainable development. Children who have gone to school will be able to do jobs so that they can take care of themselves and their families. Education helps us become aware of our role as a responsible citizen. We should
1. use the facilities present in our areas.
2. take our friends to school.
3. help friends study.
4. stop friends from dropping out of school.
Clean Water and Sanitation
We must make efforts to make India free of open defecation by building toilets and creating awareness towards sanitation.
Industrial pollution is polluting our water resources, which in near future will cause scarcity of clean drinking and usable water. We must take measurable steps by promoting awareness to keep water sources clean.
Green SkillS 111
Affordable and Clean Energy
Using solar power i.e., power generated using the sun does not cause pollution as it does not require burning of non-renewable fuels, such as coal. We are making efforts to increase the solar power generation so that our electricity needs are met and at the same time we do not pollute the environment or use up natural resources. Use of biogas is also an eco-friendly alternative to natural gas.
Decent Work and Economic Growth (a) study and find good jobs to take care of ourselves and our families.
(b) work hard and contribute to society.
(c) learn and develop skills so that we get add value in our community.
Reduced Inequalities
To reduce inequalities we can
1. be helpful to one another.
2. be friendly with everyone.
3. include everyone while working or playing.
4. help others by including everyone whether they are small or big, girl or boy, belong to any class or caste.
Sustainable Cities and Communities
Creating Sustainable Cities
1. Save energy by switching off lights and fans when not in use.
2. Use natural light as much as possible.
3. Use energy efficient lights (LED bulbs)
and appliances.
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS X 112
Responsible Consumers and Producers
We can become responsible about our own environment by
1. reusing paper, glass, plastic, water, etc.
2. taking cloth bags to market carrying fruits and vegetables.
3. donate things we do not use such as clothes, books, furniture, food, etc.
4. Buy and eat seasonal fruits and vegetables from local growers.
5. Repair leaking taps and pipes to avoid wasting water.
6. Sort and treat garbage before disposing.
Protect Life Below Water
Tons of plastic is found in the seas, which is killing marine life. Protecting marine life, saving our oceans from pollution is necessary to preserve the marine life.
Protect Life on Land
Cutting of trees is leading to soil erosion and making land dry and unusable for cultivation. Planting more tree to replace the ones that we have cut is an important step towards sustainable development.
Practical Exercise
Activity 1
Group Discussion
Procedure
• Form groups depending on the number of students available.
• Every student will describe one way in which they can work to conserve and protect the environment.
• Make a list and share it with the rest of the class.
Activity 2
Make art project using waste
Material required
Plastic bags, used bottles, papers cups, paper, wire, etc.
