Green SkillS 113
Procedure
• Form groups depending on the number of children available. Make a list of waste material that is thrown away. Now think of creative ideas in which you can use the waste material to make something useful.
If time permits, every student can get some waste material from home, such as old newspapers, plastic bottles, old cloth, etc., and make the best out of waste (a painting, wall decoration or a bag). Have an exhibition at the front gate of your school.
Check Your Progress
A. Multiple choice questions
Read the questions carefully and circle the letter (a), (b), (c) or (d) that best answers the question
1. Which of the following sources of energy is from a renewable source?
(a) Solar energy (b) Wood (c) Coals (d) Petrol
2. Choose the option which is not a sustainable development goal according to United Nations.
(a) Clean Water and Sanitation (b) Gender Equality (c) Population (d) Reduced Inequalities
B. Subjective questions
1. List some ways in which we can use resources sensibly.
2. Explain the importance of education towards sustainable development.
What Have You Learnt?
After completing this session, you will be able to
• explain the importance of our role in sustainable development.
• identify how we can contribute towards sustainable development.
A nswer Key
Unit 1: Communication Skills
Session 1: Methods of Communication
A. Multiple choice questions
Session 2: Verbal Communication
A. Multiple choice questions
3. a and b
Session 3: Non-verbal Communication
A. Multiple choice questions
B. Put an X mark against the incorrect actions below
• Laughing during formal communication X
• Scratching head X
• Smiling when speaking to a friend
• Nodding when you agree with something
• Standing straight
• Yawning while listening X
• Sitting straight
• Maintaining eye contact while speaking
• Biting nails X
• Firm handshake
• Clenching jaws X
• Looking away when someone is speaking to you X
• Intense stare X
Session 4: Communication Cycle and Importance of Feedback
A. Multiple choice questions
3. b and c
Session 5: Barriers to Effective Communication
A. Multiple choice questions
2. a and b
A nswer K ey 115
Session 6: Writing Skills — Parts of Speech
A. Multiple choice questions:
1. a and c
2. c and d
3. c and d
B. Fill in the blanks a. The boy is swimming.
b. The children are playing.
c. The students are writing.
d. Rahim is driving the car.
e. Ms Sen is teaching.
f. The cat is eating.
Session 7: Writing Skills — Sentences
A. Multiple choice questions
Unit 2: Self-management Skills
Session 3: Self-motivation
A. Multiple choice questions
2. a and c
Unit 3: Information and Communication Technology Skills
Session 1: Basic Computer Operations
A. Multiple choice questions
3. c>>d>>e>>b>>a
Session 2: Performing Basic File Operations
A. Multiple choice questions
Session 3: Computer Care and Maintenance
A. Multiple choice questions
