E mployability SkillS – ClaSS X 116
Session 4: Computer Security and Privacy
A. Multiple choice questions
Unit 4: Entrepreneurial Skills
Session 1: Entrepreneurship and Society
A. State whether the following statements are True or False
2. False
Session 2: Qualities and Functions of an Entrepreneur
A. Tick the correct option for the quality they are showing.
B. Tick the correct option for the function that the entrepreneur is doing.
Session 3: Myths about Entrepreneurship
B. Match each story below with the misconception about entrepreneurship.
Session 4: Entrepreneurship as a Career Option
A. a - wage employment b – self-employment c – self-employment
B. Match the columns
Unit 5: Green Skills
Session 1: Sustainable Development
A. Multiple choice questions
Session 2: Our Role in Sustainable Development
A. Multiple choice questions
GlossAry
Backup: this means copying data from a computer onto another storage device to ensure that no data gets lost or damaged.
Barrier: obstacle
Capital: the money used to start a business is called capital.
Career: a career is a line of work that a person takes for life.
Coherent: logical and consistent.
Concise: giving a lot of information clearly and in a few words
Creative: to have original and different ideas
Demand: is a product or service that people want.
Digital: the information that is stored on a computer is said to be in a digital form.
Effective: successful in producing a desired or intended result
Entrepreneur: a self-employed person who is always trying to make his or her business better by taking risks and trying new ideas is an entrepreneur.
Exchange: an act of giving one thing and receiving another.
Folder: a folder is a location where a group of files can be stored.
Function: it is work being done.
Habit: regular tendency.
Helpful: useful, ready to offer help.
Hire: giving work to someone and paying them for it.
Maintenance: it is way we take care of our things on a daily, weekly, monthly and yearly basis.
Myth: a myth, or a misconception, is a false belief or opinion about something.
Observe: notice or perceive.
Paralanguage: example intonation, pitch and speed of speaking, hesitation noises, gesture and facial expression.
Perspective: a particular attitude towards or way of regarding something.
Quality: a quality is the way a person acts or behaves. For example, kind, rude, etc.
Resources: a supply of things, such as material, money or natural resources, such as air, land, water, etc., that people can use in order to function properly.
Scanning: scanning for virus means using an anti-virus software, which checks the entire computer to find if the computer is infected by a dangerous virus.
Self-employed: someone who starts businesses to satisfy the needs of people.
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS X 118
SMS: Short Message Service.
Sustainable: something that can be maintained at a constant level for a long time.
Verbal: relating to or in the form of words.
Visual: relating to seeing or sight.
