56 56 56 56 56
Introductory
Macroeconomics
4.1.2. Investment
Investment is defined as addition to the stock of physical capital (such as machines, buildings, roads etc., i.e. anything that adds to the future productive capacity of the economy) and changes in the inventory (or the stock of finished goods) of a producer. Note that ‘investment goods’ (such as machines) are also part of the final goods – they are not intermediate goods like raw materials. Machines produced in an economy in a given year are not ‘used up’ to produce other goods but yield their services over a number of years.
Investment decisions by producers, such as whether to buy a new machine, depend, to a large extent, on the market rate of interest. However, for simplicity, we assume here that firms plan to invest the same amount every year. We can write the ex ante investment demand as
I = I (4.2)
where I is a positive constant which represents the autonomous (given or exogenous) investment in the economy in a given year.
4.2 DETERMINATION OF INCOME IN TWO-SECTOR MODEL
In an economy without a government, the ex ante aggregate demand for final goods is the sum total of the ex ante consumption expenditure and ex ante investment expenditure on such goods, viz. AD = C + I. Substituting the values of
C and I from equations (4.1) and (4.2), aggregate demand for final goods can be written as
AD = C + I + c.Y
If the final goods market is in equilibrium this can be written as
Y = C + I + c.Y where Y is the ex ante, or planned, ouput of final goods. This equation can be further simplified by adding up the two autonomous terms, C and I , making it
Y = A + c.Y (4.3)
where A = C + I is the total autonomous expenditure in the economy. In reality, these two components of autonomous expenditure behave in different ways.
C , representing subsistence consumption level of an economy, remains more or less stable over time. However, I has been observed to undergo periodic fluctuations.
A word of caution is in order. The term Y on the left hand side of equation (4.3)
represents the ex ante output or the planned supply of final goods. On the other hand, the expression on the right hand side denotes ex ante or planned aggregate demand for final goods in the economy. Ex ante supply is equal to ex ante demand only when the final goods market, and hence the economy, is in equilibrium. Equation (4.3) should not, therefore, be confused with the accounting identity of Chapter 2, which states that the ex post value of total output must always be equal to the sum total of ex post consumption and ex post investment in the economy. If ex ante demand for final goods falls short of the output of final goods that the producers have planned to produce in a given year, equation (4.3) will not hold. Stocks will be piling up in the warehouses which we may consider as unintended accumulation of inventories. It should be noted that inventories or stocks refers to that part of output produced which is not sold and therefore remains with the firm. Change in inventory is called
Reprint 2026-27
57 57 57 57 57
Determination of Income and Employment inventory investment. It can be negative as well as positive: if there is a rise in inventory, it is positive inventory investment, while a depletion of inventory is negative inventory investment. The inventory investment can take place due to two reasons: (i) the firm decides to keep some stocks for various reasons (this is called planned inventory investment) (ii) the sales differ from the planned level of sales, in which case the firm has to add to/run down existing inventories (this is called unplanned inventory investment). Thus even though planned Thus even though planned Thus even though planned Thus even though planned Thus even though planned Y YY YY is is is is is greater than planned greater than planned greater than planned greater than planned greater than planned C C C C C +++++ IIIII, actual , actual , actual , actual , actual Y YY YY will be equal to actual will be equal to actual will be equal to actual will be equal to actual will be equal to actual C C C C C +++++ IIIII, with , with , with , with , with the extra output showing up as unintended accumulation of inventories the extra output showing up as unintended accumulation of inventories the extra output showing up as unintended accumulation of inventories the extra output showing up as unintended accumulation of inventories the extra output showing up as unintended accumulation of inventories in the ex post in the ex post in the ex post in the ex post in the ex post IIIII on the right hand side of the accounting identity on the right hand side of the accounting identity on the right hand side of the accounting identity on the right hand side of the accounting identity on the right hand side of the accounting identity.
At this point, we can introduce a government in this economy. The major economic activities of the government that affect the aggregate demand for final goods and services can be summarized by the fiscal variables Tax (T) and
Government Expenditure (G), both autonomous to our analysis. Government, through its expenditure G on final goods and services, adds to the aggregate demand like other firms and households. On the other hand, taxes imposed by the government take a part of the income away from the household, whose disposable income, therefore, becomes Yd = Y – T. Households spend only a fraction of this disposable income for consumption purpose. Hence, equation (4.3) has to be modified in the following way to incorporate the government
Y = C + I + G + c (Y – T )
Note that G – c.T , like C or I , just adds to the autonomous term A . It does not significantly change the analysis in any qualitative way. We shall, for the sake of simplicity, ignore the government sector for the rest of this chapter.
Observe also, that without the government imposing indirect taxes and subsidies, the total value of final goods and services produced in the economy, GDP, becomes identically equal to the National Income. Henceforth, throughout the rest of the chapter, we shall refer to Y as GDP or National Income interchangeably.
4.3 D 4.3 D 4.3 D 4.3 D 4.3 DETERMINATION ETERMINATION ETERMINATION ETERMINATION ETERMINATION OF OF OF OF OF E E E E EQUILIBRIUM QUILIBRIUM QUILIBRIUM QUILIBRIUM QUILIBRIUM IIIIINCOME NCOME NCOME NCOME NCOME IN IN IN IN IN THE THE THE THE THE S S S S SHORT HORT HORT HORT HORT R R R R RUN UN UN UN UN
You would recall that in microeconomic theory when we analyse the equilibrium of demand and supply in a single market, the demand and supply curves simultaneously determine the equilibrium price and the equilibrium quantity.
In macroeconomic theory we proceed in two steps: at the first stage, we work out a macroeconomic equilibrium taking the price level as fixed. At the second stage, we allow the price level to vary and again, analyse macroeconomic equilibrium.
What is the justification for taking the price level as fixed? Two reasons can be put forward: (i) at the first stage, we are assuming an economy with unused resources: machineries, buildings and labours. In such a situation, the law of diminishing returns will not apply; hence additional output can be produced without increasing marginal cost. Accordingly, price level does not vary even if the quantity produced changes (ii) this is just a simplifying assumption which will be changed later.
4.3.1 Macroeconomic Equilibrium with Price Level Fixed 4.3.1 Macroeconomic Equilibrium with Price Level Fixed 4.3.1 Macroeconomic Equilibrium with Price Level Fixed 4.3.1 Macroeconomic Equilibrium with Price Level Fixed 4.3.1 Macroeconomic Equilibrium with Price Level Fixed (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) Graphical Method Graphical Method Graphical Method Graphical Method Graphical Method
As already explained, the consumers demand can be expressed by the equation
C C cY  
Reprint 2026-27
