PERMUTATIONS AND COMBINATIONS 101
Let us name the three pants as P1, P2 , P3 and the two shirts as S1, S2. Then, these six possibilities can be illustrated in the Fig. 6.1.
Let us consider another problem of the same type.
Sabnam has 2 school bags, 3 tiffin boxes and 2 water bottles. In how many ways can she carry these items (choosing one
A school bag can be chosen in 2 different ways. After a school bag is chosen, a tiffin box can be chosen in 3 different ways. Hence, there are
2 × 3 = 6 pairs of school bag and a tiffin box. For each of these pairs a water bottle can be chosen in 2 different ways.
Hence, there are 6 × 2 = 12 different ways in which, Sabnam can carry these items to school. If we name the 2 school bags as B1, B2, the three tiffin boxes as T1, T2, T3 and the two water bottles as W1, W2, these possibilities can be illustrated in the Fig. 6.2.
Reprint 2026-27
102 MATHEMATICS
In fact, the problems of the above types are solved by applying the following principle known as the fundamental principle of counting, or, simply, the multiplication principle, which states that
“If an event can occur in m different ways, following which another event can occur in n different ways, then the total number of occurrence of the events in the given order is m×n.”
The above principle can be generalised for any finite number of events. For example, for 3 events, the principle is as follows:
‘If an event can occur in m different ways, following which another event can occur in n different ways, following which a third event can occur in p different ways, then the total number of occurrence to ‘the events in the given order is m × n × p.”
In the first problem, the required number of ways of wearing a pant and a shirt was the number of different ways of the occurence of the following events in succession:
(i) the event of choosing a pant (ii) the event of choosing a shirt.
In the second problem, the required number of ways was the number of different ways of the occurence of the following events in succession:
(i) the event of choosing a school bag (ii) the event of choosing a tiffin box (iii) the event of choosing a water bottle.
Here, in both the cases, the events in each problem could occur in various possible orders. But, we have to choose any one of the possible orders and count the number of different ways of the occurence of the events in this chosen order.
Example 1 Find the number of 4 letter words, with or without meaning, which can be formed out of the letters of the word ROSE, where the repetition of the letters is not allowed.
Solution There are as many words as there are ways of filling in 4 vacant places by the 4 letters, keeping in mind that the repetition is not allowed. The first place can be filled in 4 different ways by anyone of the 4 letters R,O,S,E. Following which, the second place can be filled in by anyone of the remaining 3 letters in 3 different ways, following which the third place can be filled in 2 different ways; following which, the fourth place can be filled in 1 way. Thus, the number of ways in which the
4 places can be filled, by the multiplication principle, is 4 × 3 × 2 × 1 = 24. Hence, the required number of words is 24.
Reprint 2026-27
PERMUTATIONS AND COMBINATIONS 103
ANote If the repetition of the letters was allowed, how many words can be formed?
One can easily understand that each of the 4 vacant places can be filled in succession in 4 different ways. Hence, the required number of words = 4 × 4 × 4 × 4 = 256.
Example 2 Given 4 flags of different colours, how many different signals can be generated, if a signal requires the use of 2 flags one below the other?
Solution There will be as many signals as there are ways of filling in 2 vacant places in succession by the 4 flags of different colours. The upper vacant place can be filled in 4 different ways by anyone of the 4 flags; following which, the lower vacant place can be filled in 3 different ways by anyone of the remaining 3 different flags.
Hence, by the multiplication principle, the required number of signals = 4 × 3 = 12.
Example 3 How many 2 digit even numbers can be formed from the digits
1, 2, 3, 4, 5 if the digits can be repeated?
Solution There will be as many ways as there are ways of filling 2 vacant places in succession by the five given digits. Here, in this case, we start filling in unit’s place, because the options for this place are 2 and 4 only and this can be done in 2 ways; following which the ten’s place can be filled by any of the 5 digits in 5 different ways as the digits can be repeated. Therefore, by the multiplication principle, the required number of two digits even numbers is 2 × 5, i.e., 10.
Example 4 Find the number of different signals that can be generated by arranging at least 2 flags in order (one below the other) on a vertical staff, if five different flags are available.
Solution A signal can consist of either 2 flags, 3 flags, 4 flags or 5 flags. Now, let us count the possible number of signals consisting of 2 flags, 3 flags, 4 flags and 5 flags separately and then add the respective numbers.
There will be as many 2 flag signals as there are ways of filling in 2 vacant places in succession by the 5 flags available. By Multiplication rule, the number of ways is 5 × 4 = 20.
Similarly, there will be as many 3 flag signals as there are ways of filling in 3 vacant places in succession by the 5 flags.
Reprint 2026-27
104 MATHEMATICS
The number of ways is 5 × 4 × 3 = 60.
Continuing the same way, we find that
The number of 4 flag signals = 5 × 4 × 3 × 2 = 120 and the number of 5 flag signals = 5 × 4 × 3 × 2 × 1 = 120
Therefore, the required no of signals = 20 + 60 + 120 + 120 = 320.
EXERCISE 6.1
1. How many 3-digit numbers can be formed from the digits 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 assuming that (i) repetition of the digits is allowed?
(ii) repetition of the digits is not allowed?
2. How many 3-digit even numbers can be formed from the digits 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 if the digits can be repeated?
3. How many 4-letter code can be formed using the first 10 letters of the English alphabet, if no letter can be repeated?
4. How many 5-digit telephone numbers can be constructed using the digits 0 to 9 if each number starts with 67 and no digit appears more than once?
5. A coin is tossed 3 times and the outcomes are recorded. How many possible outcomes are there?
6. Given 5 flags of different colours, how many different signals can be generated if each signal requires the use of 2 flags, one below the other?
6.3 Permutations
In Example 1 of the previous Section, we are actually counting the different possible arrangements of the letters such as ROSE, REOS, ..., etc. Here, in this list, each arrangement is different from other. In other words, the order of writing the letters is important. Each arrangement is called a permutation of 4 different letters taken all at a time. Now, if we have to determine the number of 3-letter words, with or without meaning, which can be formed out of the letters of the word NUMBER, where the repetition of the letters is not allowed, we need to count the arrangements NUM,
NMU, MUN, NUB, ..., etc. Here, we are counting the permutations of 6 different letters taken 3 at a time. The required number of words = 6 × 5 × 4 = 120 (by using multiplication principle).
If the repetition of the letters was allowed, the required number of words would be 6 × 6 × 6 = 216.
Reprint 2026-27
