258 MATHEMATICS
Also, the median is obtained by first arranging the data in ascending or descending order and applying the following rule.
If the number of observations is odd, then the median is
  observation.
If the number of observations is even, then median is the mean of
  observations.
We find that the mean and median of the runs scored by both the batsmen A and
B are same i.e., 53. Can we say that the performance of two players is same? Clearly
No, because the variability in the scores of batsman A is from 0 (minimum) to 117 (maximum). Whereas, the range of the runs scored by batsman B is from 46 to 60.
Let us now plot the above scores as dots on a number line. We find the following diagrams:
For batsman A
For batsman B
We can see that the dots corresponding to batsman B are close to each other and are clustering around the measure of central tendency (mean and median), while those corresponding to batsman A are scattered or more spread out.
Thus, the measures of central tendency are not sufficient to give complete information about a given data. Variability is another factor which is required to be studied under statistics. Like ‘measures of central tendency’ we want to have a single number to describe variability. This single number is called a ‘measure of dispersion’. In this Chapter, we shall learn some of the important measures of dispersion and their methods of calculation for ungrouped and grouped data.
Fig 13.1
Fig 13.2
Reprint 2026-27
STATISTICS 259
13.2 Measures of Dispersion
The dispersion or scatter in a data is measured on the basis of the observations and the types of the measure of central tendency, used there. There are following measures of dispersion:
(i) Range, (ii) Quartile deviation, (iii) Mean deviation, (iv) Standard deviation.
In this Chapter, we shall study all of these measures of dispersion except the quartile deviation.
13.3 Range
Recall that, in the example of runs scored by two batsmen A and B, we had some idea of variability in the scores on the basis of minimum and maximum runs in each series.
To obtain a single number for this, we find the difference of maximum and minimum values of each series. This difference is called the ‘Range’ of the data.
In case of batsman A, Range = 117 – 0 = 117 and for batsman B, Range = 60 – 46 = 14.
Clearly, Range of A > Range of B. Therefore, the scores are scattered or dispersed in case of A while for B these are close to each other.
Thus, Range of a series = Maximum value – Minimum value.
The range of data gives us a rough idea of variability or scatter but does not tell about the dispersion of the data from a measure of central tendency. For this purpose, we need some other measure of variability. Clearly, such measure must depend upon the difference (or deviation) of the values from the central tendency.
The important measures of dispersion, which depend upon the deviations of the observations from a central tendency are mean deviation and standard deviation. Let us discuss them in detail.
13.4 Mean Deviation
Recall that the deviation of an observation x from a fixed value ‘a’ is the difference x – a. In order to find the dispersion of values of x from a central value ‘a’ , we find the deviations about a. An absolute measure of dispersion is the mean of these deviations.
To find the mean, we must obtain the sum of the deviations. But, we know that a measure of central tendency lies between the maximum and the minimum values of the set of observations. Therefore, some of the deviations will be negative and some positive. Thus, the sum of deviations may vanish. Moreover, the sum of the deviations from mean ( x ) is zero.
Also Mean of deviations Sum of deviations 0 0
Number of observations n
Thus, finding the mean of deviations about mean is not of any use for us, as far as the measure of dispersion is concerned.
Reprint 2026-27
