Contemporary World Politics 16
E uropEan union
As the Second World War came to an end, many of Europe’s leaders grappled with the ‘Question of Europe’. Should Europe be allowed to revert to its old rivalries or be reconstructed on principles and institutions that would contribute to a positive conception of international relations? The
Second World War shattered many of the assumptions and structures on which the European states had based their relations. In 1945, the
European states confronted the ruin of their economies and the destruction of the assumptions and structures on which Europe had been founded.
European integration after
1945 was aided by the Cold
War. America extended massive financial help for reviving Europe’s economy under what was called the ‘Marshall Plan’. The US also created a new collective security structure under NATO. Under the
Marshall Plan, the Organisation for
European Economic Cooperation (OEEC) was established in 1948 to channel aid to the west European states. It became a forum where the western European states began to cooperate on trade and economic issues. The Council of
Europe, established in 1949, was another step forward in political cooperation. The process of economic integration of European capitalist countries proceeded step by step (see Timeline of
European Integration) leading to the formation of the European
Economic Community in 1957.
This process acquired a political dimension with the creation of the European Parliament.
The collapse of the Soviet bloc put Europe on a fast track and resulted in the establishment of the European Union in 1992.
The foundation was thus laid for a common foreign and security policy, cooperation on justice and home affairs, and the creation of a single currency.
The European Union has e v o l v e d o v e r t i m e f r o m a n e c o n o m i c u n i o n t o a n increasingly political one. The
EU has started to act more as a nation state. While the attempts to have a Constitution for the
EU have failed, it has its own flag, anthem, founding date, and currency. It also has some form of a common foreign and security policy in its dealings with other nations. The European Union has tried to expand areas of cooperation while acquiring new
The European Union Flag
The circle of gold stars stands for solidarity and harmony between the peoples of Europe. It has twelve stars, as the number twelve is traditionally the symbol of perfection, completeness and unity.
Source: http://europa.eu/abc/symbols/emblem/index_en.htm
Reprint 2026-27
17 Contemporary C entres of Power members, especially from the erstwhile Soviet bloc. The process has not proved easy, for people in many countries are not very enthusiastic in giving the EU powers that were exercised by the government of their country.
There are also reservations about including some new countries within the EU.
T h e E U h a s e c o n o m i c , political and diplomatic, and military influence. The European
Union’s GDP is projected to be approximately $19.35 trillion in the year 2024. Its currency, the euro, can pose a threat to the dominance of the US dollar.
Its share of world trade is much larger than that of the United
States allowing it to be more assertive in trade disputes with the US and China. Its economic power gives it influence over its closest neighbours as well as in
Asia and Africa. It also functions as an important bloc in international
Oh, now I know what a
Schengen visa means!
Under the Schengen agreement, you have to get a visa from just one of the EU countries and that allows you entry in most of the other European
Union countries.
E uropEan union Map
Portugal
Luxembourg
Belgium Germany
Netherlands
Lithuania
Republic
Slovakia
Slovenia
Older Members
New Members
Croatia Romania
Bulgaria
Reprint 2026-27
Contemporary World Politics 18 of the EU, France, holds permanent seat on the UN Security Council.
The EU includes several non- per manent members of the
UNSC. This has enabled the EU to influence some US policies such as the current US position on Iran’s nuclear programme.
Its use of diplomacy, economic investments, and negotiations rather than coercion and military force has been effective as in the case of its dialogue with China on human rights and environmental degradation.
Militarily, the EU’s combined armed forces are the second largest in the world. Its total spending on defence is second after the US. One EU member state, France, also has nuclear a r s e n a l s o f a p p r o x i m a t e l y
335 nuclear warheads. It is also the world’s second most important source of space and communications technology.
As a supranational organi- sation, the EU is able to intervene in economic, political and social areas. But in many areas its member states have their own foreign relations and defence policies that are often at odds with each other. Thus, Britain’s
Prime Minister Tony Blair was
America’s partner in the Iraq invasion, and many of the EU’s newer members made up the
US-led ‘coalition of the willing’ whereas Germany and France opposed American policy. There is also a deep-seated ‘Euro- s k e p t i c i s m ’ i n s o m e p a r t s
TIMELINE OF EUROPEAN
INTEGRATION
1951 April: Six west European countries, France, West
Germany, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg sign the Treaty of Paris establishing the European Coal and
Steel Community (ECSC).
1957 March 25: These six countries sign the Treaties of Rome establishing the European Economic Community (EEC) and the European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom).
1973 January: Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom join the European Economic Community (EEC).
1979 June: First direct elections to the European Parliament
1981 January: Greece joins the EEC.
1985 June: The Schengen Agreement abolishes border controls among the EEC members.
1986 January: Spain and Portugal join the EEC.
1990 October: Unification of Germany.
1992 February 7: The Treaty of Maastricht was signed establishing the European Union (EU).
1993 January: European Economic Community (EEC) was renamed the European Community (EC).
1995 January: Austria, Finland and Sweden join the EU.
2002 January: Euro, the new currency, was introduced in the 12 EU members.
2004 May: Ten new members, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia join the EU.
2007 January: Bulgaria and Romania join the EU. Slovenia adopts the Euro.
2009 December: The Lisbon Treaty came into force.
2012 : The EU is awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.
2013: Croatia becomes the 28th member of the EU.
2016: Referendum in Britain, 51.9 per cent voters decide that
Britain exit (Brexit) from the EU.
economic organisations such as the World Trade Organisation
The EU also has political and diplomatic influence. One member
Reprint 2026-27
19 Contemporary C entres of Power o f E u r o p e a b o u t t h e E U ’ s integrationist agenda. Thus, for example, Britain’s former prime minister, Margaret Thatcher, kept the UK out of the European
Market. Denmark and Sweden have resisted the Maastricht
Treaty and the adoption of the euro, the common European currency. This limits the ability of the EU to act in matters of foreign relations and defence.
association of south
E ast asian nations
Take a look at the political map of the world. Which countries would you say fall in the southeastern
Imagine what would happen if they have a European Union football team!
region of Asia? Before and during the Second World War, this region of Asia suffered the economic and political consequences of repeated colonialisms, both European and
Japanese. At the end of the war, it confronted problems of nation- building, the ravages of poverty and economic backwardness and the pressure to align with one great power or another during the Cold War. This was a recipe for conflict, which the countries of Southeast Asia could ill afford.
Efforts at Asian and Third World unity, such as the Bandung
Conference and the Non-Aligned
Movement, were ineffective in establishing the conventions for informal cooperation and interaction. Hence, the Southeast
The cartoon appeared in 2003 when the European Union’s initiative to draft a common constitution failed. Why does the cartoonist use the image of the ship
Titanic to represent EU?
© Ares, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
Reprint 2026-27
Contemporary World Politics 20
Asian alternative by establishing the Association of South East
Asian Nations (ASEAN).
ASEAN was established in
1967 by five countries of this region — Indonesia, Malaysia, t h e P h i l i p p i n e s , S i n g a p o r e and Thailand — by signing the Bangkok Declaration. The objectives of ASEAN were primarily to accelerate economic growth and through that ‘social progress and cultural development’. A secondary objective was to promote regional peace and stability based on the rule of law and the principles of the United
Nations Charter. Over the years,
Brunei Darussalam, Vietnam,
Lao PDR, Myanmar (Burma) and
Cambodia joined ASEAN taking its strength to ten.
Unlike the EU there is little desire in ASEAN for supranational structures and institutions. ASEAN countries have celebrated what has become known as the ‘ASEAN Way’, a form of interaction that is informal, non-confrontationist and cooperative. The respect for national sovereignty is critical to the functioning of ASEAN.
With some of the fastest growing economies in the world, ASEAN broadened i t s o b j e c t i v e s b e y o n d the economic and social spheres. In 2003, ASEAN moved along the path of the
EU by agreeing to establish an ASEAN Community comprising three pillars, namely, the ASEAN Security
Community, the ASEAN Economic
Community and the ASEAN Socio-
Cultural Community.
The ASEAN Flag
In the ASEAN logo, the ten stalks of paddy (rice) represent the ten Southeast
Asian countries bound together in friendship and solidarity. The circle symbolises the unity of ASEAN.
Source : www.aseansec.org the ASEAN members on the map. Find the location of the ASEAN
Secretariat.
Source: http://www.unicef.org/eapro/EAP_map_final.gif
Note: Maps on this site do not reflect a position by UNICEF on the legal status of any country or territory or the delimitation of any frontiers.
Map Of east asia and pacific
Reprint 2026-27
21 Contemporary C entres of Power
T h e A S E A N s e c u r i t y community was based on the conviction that outstanding territorial disputes should not escalate into armed confrontation.
By 2003, ASEAN had several agreements in place by which member states promised to uphold peace, neutrality, cooperation, non-interference, and respect for national differences and sovereign rights. The ASEAN
Regional Forum (ARF), which was established in 1994, is the organisation that carries out coordination of security and foreign policy.
A S E A N w a s a n d s t i l l remains principally an economic association. While the ASEAN region as a whole is a much smaller economy compared to the US, the EU, and Japan, its economy is growing much faster than all these. This accounts for the growth in its influence both in the region and beyond. The objectives of the ASEAN Economic
Community are to create a common market and production base within ASEAN states and to aid social and economic development in the region. The
Economic Community would also like to improve the existing ASEAN
Dispute Settlement Mechanism to resolve economic disputes. ASEAN has focused on creating a Free
Trade Area (FTA) for investment, labour, and services. The US and
China have already moved fast to negotiate FTAs with ASEAN.
ASEAN is rapidly growing into a very important regional organisation. Its Vision 2020 has defined an outward-looking role for ASEAN in the international community. This builds on the existing ASEAN policy to encourage negotiation over conflicts in the region. Thus, ASEAN has mediated the end of the Cambodian conflict, the East Timor crisis, and meets annually to discuss East Asian cooperation.
The current economic strength of ASEAN, especially its economic relevance as a trading and investment partner to the growing
Asian economies such as India and
China, makes this an attractive proposition. During the Cold War years Indian foreign policy did not pay adequate attention to ASEAN.
But in recent years, India has tried to make amends. It signed trade agreements with three ASEAN members, Malaysia, Singapore and
Isn’t India a part of
Southeast Asia? The north-eastern states are so close to the
ASEAN countries.
India’s ‘Look East’ Policy since the early 1990s and ‘Act East’ Policy since 2014 have led to greater economic interaction with the East
Asian nations (ASEAN, China, Japan and South Korea).
Regional
Keshav, The Hindu
Reprint 2026-27
Contemporary World Politics 22
Thailand. The ASEAN-India
FTA came into effect in 2010.
ASEAN’s strength, however, lies in its policies of interaction and consultation with member states, with dialogue partners, and with other non-regional organisations.
It is the only regional association in Asia that provides a political forum where Asian countries and the major powers can discuss political and security concerns.
regional affairs. The strength of its economy, together with other factors such as population, land mass, resources, regional location and political influence, adds to its power in significant ways.
After the inception of the
People’s Republic of China in
1949, following the communist revolution under the leadership of Mao, its economy was based on the Soviet model. The economically backward communist China chose to sever its links with the capitalist world. It had little choice but to fall back on its own resources and, for a brief period, on Soviet aid and advice. The model was to create a state-owned heavy industries sector from the capital accumulated from agriculture. As it was short of foreign exchange that it needed in order to buy technology and goods on the world market, China decided to substitute imports by domestic
This model allowed China to use its resources to establish the foundations of an industrial economy on a scale that did not exist before. Employment and social welfare was assured to all citizens, and China moved ahead of most developing countries in educating its citizens and ensuring better health for them.
The economy also grew at a respectable rate of 5-6 per cent.
But an annual growth of 2-3 per cent in population meant t h a t e c o n o m i c g r o w t h w a s insufficient to meet the needs of a growing population. Agricultural production was not sufficient to
The Rise of The Chinese
Let us now turn to the third major alternative centre of power and our immediate neighbour, China.
The cartoon on the following page sums up the current mood all over the world about the rise of China as an economic power.
China’s economic success since
1978 has been linked to its rise as a great power. China has been the fastest growing economy since the reforms first began there. It is projected to overtake the US as the world’s largest economy by
2040. Its economic integration into the region makes it the driver of East Asian growth, thereby giving it enormous influence in
Why did ASEAN succeed whereas
SAARC did not?
Leaders release postal stamps to commemorate silver jubilee of India and ASEAN partnership in New Delhi on 25 January 2018
Reprint 2026-27
23 Contemporary C entres of Power generate a surplus for industry. In
Chapter 1, we discussed the crisis of the state controlled economy in the USSR. A similar crisis was to face China too: its industrial production was not growing fast enough, international trade was minimal and per capita income was very low.
The Chinese leadership took major policy decisions in the
1970s. China ended its political and economic isolation with the establishment of relations with the United States in 1972.
Premier Zhou Enlai proposed the
‘four modernisations’ (agriculture, industry, science and technology and military) in 1973. By 1978, the then leader Deng Xiaoping announced the ‘open door’ policy and economic reforms in China.
The policy was to generate higher productivity by investments of capital and technology from
China followed its own path in introducing a market economy.
The Chinese did not go for ‘shock therapy’ but opened their economy step by step. The privatisation of agriculture in 1982 was followed by the privatisation of industry in 1998.
Trade barriers were eliminated only in Special Economic Zones (SEZs)
where foreign investors could set up enterprises. In China, the state played and continues to play a central role in setting up a market economy.
The new economic policies helped the Chinese economy t o b r e a k f r o m s t a g n a t i o n .
Privatisation of agriculture led to a remarkable rise in agricultural production and rural incomes.
High personal savings in the rural economy lead to an exponential growth in rural industry. The
Chinese economy, including both industry and agriculture, grew at a faster rate. The new trading laws and the creation of Special Economic Zones led to a phenomenal rise in foreign trade. China has become the most important destination for foreign direct investment (FDI) anywhere in the world. It has large foreign exchange reserves that now allow it to make big investment in other countries. China’s accession to the
A total of 6 SEZs in
China and more than
200 approved SEZs in
India! Is this good for
The Great Wall and Dragon are two symbols most commonly associated with China. This cartoon uses both these to depict
China’s economic rise. Who do you think is the little man in this cartoon? Can he stop the dragon?
© Deng Coy Miel, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
Reprint 2026-27
Contemporary World Politics 24
WTO in 2001 has been a further step in its opening to the outside world. The country plans to deepen its integration into the world economy and shape the future world economic order.
While the Chinese economy has improved dramatically, not everyone in China has received the benefits o
