Contemporary World Politics 30
What is south asia?
We are all familiar with the gripping tension during an
India-Pakistan cricket match.
We have also seen the goodwill and hospitality shown to visiting
Indian and Pakistani fans by their hosts when they come to watch a cricket match. This is symbolic of the larger pattern of South Asian affairs. Ours is a region where rivalry and goodwill, hope and despair, mutual suspicion and trust coexist.
Let us begin by asking an elementary question: what is
South Asia? The expression
‘South Asia’ usually includes the following countries: Bangladesh,
Bhutan, India, the Maldives,
Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka. The mighty Himalayas in the north and the vast Indian Ocean, the Arabian
Sea and the Bay of Bengal in the south, west and east respectively provide a natural insularity to the region, which is largely responsible for the linguistic, social and cultural distinctiveness of the sub- continent. The boundaries of the region are not as clear in the east and the west, as they are in the north and the south. Afghanistan and Myanmar are often included in discussions of the region as a whole. China is an important player but is not considered to be a part of the region. In this chapter, we shall use South Asia to mean the seven countries mentioned above. Thus defined, South Asia stands for diversity in every sense and yet constitutes one geo- political space.
The various countries in South
Asia do not have the same kind of political systems. Despite many problems and limitations, Sri
Lanka and India have successfully operated a democratic system since their independence from the British. You will study more about the evolution of democracy in India in the textbook that deals with politics in India since independence. It is, of course, possible to point out many limitations of India’s democracy;
but we have to remember the fact that India has remained a democracy throughout its existence as an independent country. The same is true of Sri
Pakistan and Bangladesh h a v e e x p e r i e n c e d b o t h civilian and military rulers, with Bangladesh remaining a democracy in the post-Cold War period. Pakistan began the post-
Cold War period with successive democratic governments under
B e n a z i r B h u t t o a n d N a w a z
S h a r i f r e s p e c t i v e l y . B u t i t suffered a military coup in
1999. It has been run by a civilian government again since
2008. Till 2006, Nepal was a constitutional monarchy with the danger of the king taking over executive powers. In 2008, the monarchy was abolished and
Nepal emerged as a democratic republic. From the experience of
Bangladesh and Nepal, we can say that democracy is becoming an accepted norm in the entire region of South Asia.
Identify some features common to all the South
Asian countries but different from countries in West Asia or
Southeast Asia.
Is there a fixed definition of these regions? Who decides that?
Reprint 2026-27
31 Contemporary South Asia
Similar changes are taking place in the two smallest countries of the region. Bhutan became a constitutional monarchy in 2008.
Under the leadership of the king, it emerged as a multi-party democracy. The Maldives, the other island nation, was a Sultanate till
1968 when it was transformed into a republic with a presidential form of government. In
June 2005, the parliament of the Maldives voted unanimously to introduce a multi-party system. The Maldivian Democratic Party (MDP)
dominates the political affairs of the island. The
MDP won the 2018 Elections.
Despite the mixed record of the democratic experience, the people in all these countries share the aspiration for democracy. A recent survey of the attitudes of the people in the five big countries of the region showed that there is widespread support for democracy in all these countries. Ordinary citizens, rich as well as poor and belonging to different religions, view the idea of democracy positively and support the institutions of representative democracy. They prefer democracy over any other form of government and think that democracy is suitable for their country. These are significant findings, for it was earlier believed that democracy could flourish and find support only in prosperous countries of the world.
Both these graphs are based on interviews with more than 19,000 ordinary citizens in the five countries of
South Asia. Source: SDSA Team, State of Democracy in South Asia, New Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2007
Countries
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Adult literacy rate (% ages
15 and older)
2006-2016 enrolment ratio (Secondary)
2012-2017 capita (2011
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
TB cases (per 100,000
Population living below income poverty line (%)
PPP $1.90 a day
2006-2016
World 72.2 82.1 79 15,439 29.9 140.0 – –
Developing 70.7 81.1 75 10,199 32.7 164.5 – – countries
South Asia 69.3 68.7 71 6,485 37.8 206.3 – –
Bangladesh 72.8 72.8 69 3,524 28.2 221.0 14.8 136
India 68.8 69.3 75 6,427 34.6 211.0 21.2 130
Nepal 70.6 59.6 71 2,433 28.4 154.0 15.0 149
Pakistan 66.6 57.0 46 5,035 64.2 268.0 6.1 150
Sri Lanka 75.5 91.2 98 11,669 8.0 65.0 – 76
Source: United Nations Development Programme, Human Development Report, 2018
Reprint 2026-27
Contemporary World Politics 32
In that sense the South Asian experience of democracy has expanded the global imagination of democracy.
Let us look at the experience of democracy in each of the four big countries of the region other than India.
the Military and deMocracy in Pakistan
After Pakistan framed its first constitution, General Ayub Khan took over the administration of the country and soon got himself elected. He had to give up office when there was popular dissatisfaction against his rule.
This gave way to a military takeover once again under General
Yahya Khan. During Yahya’s military rule, Pakistan faced the
Bangladesh crisis, and after a war with India in 1971, East
Pakistan broke away to emerge as an independent country called
Bangladesh. After this, an elected government under the leadership of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto came to power in Pakistan from 1971 to
1977. The Bhutto government was removed by General Zia- ul-Haq in 1977. General Zia faced a pro-democracy movement from 1982 onwards and an elected democratic government was established once again in
1988 under the leadership of
Benazir Bhutto. In the period that followed, Pakistani politics centred around the competition between her party, the Pakistan
People’s Party, and the Muslim
TIMELINE OF SOUTH ASIA
SINCE 1947
1947: India and Pakistan emerge as independent nations after the end of British rule
1948: Sri Lanka (then Ceylon) gains independence; Indo-Pak conflict over Kashmir
1954-55: Pakistan joins the Cold War military blocs, SEATO and CENTO
1960: India and Pakistan sign the Indus Waters Treaty
1962: Border conflict between India and China
1965: Indo-Pak War; UN India-Pakistan Observation Mission
1966: India and Pakistan sign the Tashkent Agreement;
Six-point proposal of Sheikh Mujib-ur Rahman for greater autonomy to East Pakistan
1971 March: Proclamation of Independence by leaders of
Bangladesh
August : Indo-Soviet Treaty of Friendship signed for 20 years
December : Indo-Pak War, Liberation of Bangladesh
1972 July: India and Pakistan sign the Simla Agreement
1974 May: India conducts nuclear test
1976: Pakistan and Bangladesh establish diplomatic ties
1985 December: South Asian leaders sign the SAARC Charter at the first summit in Dhaka
1987: Indo-Sri Lanka Accord; Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF) operation in Sri Lanka (1987-90)
1988: India sends troops to the Maldives to foil a coup attempt by mercenaries
India and Pakistan sign the agreement not to attack nuclear installations and facilities of each other
1988-91: Democracy restoration in Pakistan, Bangladesh and Nepal
1996 December: India and Bangladesh sign the Farakka
Treaty for sharing of the Ganga Waters
1998 May: India and Pakistan conduct nuclear tests
December: India and Sri Lanka sign the Free Trade Agreement
1999 February: Indian PM Vajpayee undertakes bus journey to Lahore to sign a Peace Declaration
June-July: Kargil conflict between India and Pakistan
2001 July: Vajpayee - Musharraf Agra Summit unsuccessful
2004 January: SAFTA signed at the 12th SAARC Summit in
Islamabad
2007: Afghanistan joins SAARC
2014 November: The 18th SAARC Summit in Kathmandu,
Reprint 2026-27
33 Contemporary South Asia
League. This phase of elective democracy lasted till 1999 when the army stepped in again and General Pervez Musharraf removed Prime Minister Nawaz
S h a r i f . I n 2 0 0 1 , G e n e r a l
Musharraf got himself elected as the President. Pakistan continued to be ruled by the army, though the army rulers have held some elections to give their rule a democratic image. Since 2008, democratically elected leaders have been ruling Pakistan.
S e v e r a l f a c t o r s h a v e contributed to Pakistan’s failure in building a stable democracy.
The social dominance of the military, clergy, and landowning aristocracy has led to the frequent overthrow of elected governments and the establishment of military government. Pakistan’s conflict with India has made the pro- military groups more powerful.
These groups have often said that political parties and democracy in Pakistan are flawed, that
Pakistan’s security would be harmed by selfish-minded parties and chaotic democracy, and that the army’s stay in power is, therefore, justified. While democracy has not been fully successful in Pakistan, there has been a strong pro-democracy sentiment in the country. Pakistan has a courageous and relatively free press and a strong human rights movement.
T h e l a c k o f g e n u i n e i n t e r n a t i o n a l s u p p o r t f o r democratic rule in Pakistan has further encouraged the military to continue its dominance. The
United States and other Western countries have encouraged the military’s authoritarian rule in the past, for their own reasons. Given their fear of the threat of what they call ‘global Islamic terrorism’ and the apprehension that Pakistan’s nuclear arsenal might fall into the hands of these terrorist groups, the military regime in Pakistan has been seen as the protector of Western interests in West Asia and South Asia.
deMocracy in Bangladesh
Bangladesh was a part of Pakistan from 1947 to 1971. It consisted of the partitioned areas of Bengal and Assam from British India. The people of this region resented the domination of western Pakistan and the imposition of the Urdu language. Soon after the partition,
This cartoon comments on the dual role of Pakistan’s ruler Pervez
Musharraf as the President of the country and as the army General.
Read the equations carefully and write down the message of this cartoon.
If Germany can be reunited, why can’t the people of India and Pakistan at least travel more easily to each other’s country?
Surendra, The Hindu
Reprint 2026-27
Contemporary World Politics 34 they began protests against the unfair treatment meted out to the Bengali culture and language.
T h e y a l s o d e m a n d e d f a i r representation in administration and a fair share in political power.
Sheikh Mujib-ur Rahman led the popular struggle against
West Pakistani domination. He demanded autonomy for the easter n region. In the 1970 elections in the then Pakistan, the Awami League led by Sheikh
Mujib won all the seats in East
Pakistan and secured a majority in the proposed constituent a s s e m b l y f o r t h e w h o l e o f
Pakistan. But the government dominated by the West Pakistani leadership refused to convene the assembly. Sheikh Mujib was arrested. Under the military rule of General Yahya Khan, the
Pakistani army tried to suppress the mass movement of the Bengali people. Thousands were killed by the Pakistan army. This led to a large scale migration into India, creating a huge refugee problem for India. The government of India supported the demand of the people of East Pakistan for their independence and helped them financially and militarily. This resulted in a war between India and Pakistan in December 1971 that ended in the surrender of the
Pakistani forces in East Pakistan and the formation of Bangladesh as an independent country.
A mural in Jahangirnagar University, Savar, Dhaka to remember Noor Hossain who was killed by the police during pro-democracy protests against General Ershad in 1987. Painted on his back: “Let Democracy be Freed” .
Photo credit: Shahidul Alam/ Drik
Reprint 2026-27
35 Contemporary South Asia
B a n g l a d e s h d r a f t e d i t s constitution declaring faith in secularism, democracy and socialism. However, in 1975
Sheikh Mujib got the constitution amended to shift fr om the parliamentary to presidential form of government. He also abolished all parties except his own, the Awami League. This led to conflicts and tensions. In a dramatic and tragic development, he was assassinated in a military uprising in August 1975. The new military ruler, Ziaur Rahman, for med his own Bangladesh
National Party and won elections in 1979. He was assassinated and another military takeover followed under the leadership of Lt Gen H. M. Ershad. The people of Bangladesh soon rose in support of the demand for democracy. Students were in the forefront. Ershad was forced to allow political activity on a limited scale. He was later elected as President for five years. Mass public protests made Ershad step down in 1990. Elections were held in 1991. Since then representative democracy based on multi-party elections has been working in Bangladesh.
Monarchy and deMocracy in nePal
Nepal was a Hindu kingdom in the past and then a constitutional monarchy in the modern period for many years. Throughout this period, political parties and the common people of Nepal have wanted a more open and responsive system of government.
But the king, with the help of the army, retained full control over the government and restricted the expansion of democracy in Nepal.
The king accepted the demand for a new democratic constitution in 1990, in the wake of a strong pro- democracy movement. However, democratic governments had a short and troubled career. During the nineties, the Maoists of Nepal were successful in spreading their influence in many parts of
Nepal. They believed in armed insurrection against the monarch and the ruling elite. This led to a violent conflict between the
Maoist guerrillas and the armed forces of the king. For some time, there was a triangular conflict among the monarchist forces, the democrats and the Maoists.
In 2002, the king abolished the parliament and dismissed the government, thus ending even the limited democracy that existed in
In April 2006, there were massive, country wide, pro- d e m o c r a c y p r o t e s t s . T h e struggling pro-democracy forces achieved their first major victory when the king was forced to restore the House of Representatives that had been dissolved in April
2002. The largely non-violent movement was led by the Seven
Party Alliance (SPA), the Maoists and social activists.
N e p a l ’ s t r a n s i t i o n t o democracy is almost complete.
Nepal has undergone a unique moment in its history because it formed a constituent assembly to
Let’s know more about
Bangladesh’s
Grameen Bank.
Can we make use of the idea to reduce poverty in
Reprint 2026-27
Contemporary World Politics 36 draft the constitution for Nepal.
Some sections in Nepal thought that a nominal monarchy was necessary for Nepal to retain its link with the past. The Maoist g r o u p s a g r e e d t o s u s p e n d armed struggle. They wanted the constitution to include the radical programmes of social and economic restructuring. All the parties in the SPA did not agree with this programme. The Maoists and some other political groups were also deeply suspicious of the Indian government and its role in the future of Nepal. In
2008, Nepal became a democratic republic after abolishing the monarchy. In 2015, it adopted a new constitution.
ethnic conflict and deMocracy in sri lanka
We have already seen that Sri
Lanka has retained democracy since its independence in 1948.
But it faced a serious challenge, not from the military or monarchy but rather from ethnic conflict l e a d i n g t o t h e d e m a n d f o r secession by one of the regions.
After its independence, politics in Sri Lanka (it was then known as
Ceylon) was dominated by forces that represented the interest of the majority Sinhala community. They were hostile to a large number of
Tamils who had migrated from
India to Sri Lanka and settled there. This migration continued even after independence. The
Sinhala nationalists thought that Sri Lanka should not give
‘concessions’ to the Tamils because
Sri Lanka belongs to the Sinhala people only. The neglect of Tamil concerns led to militant Tamil nationalism. From 1983 onwards, the militant organisation, the
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam
Nepal sounds really exciting. I wish I was in Nepal!
Democracy activist, Durga Thapa, participating in a pro-democracy rally in
Kathmandu in 1990. The second picture shows the same person in 2006, this time celebrating the success of the second democracy movement.
Photo credit: Min Bajracharya
Reprint 2026-27
37 Contemporary South Asia (LTTE) was fighting an armed struggle with the army of Sri Lanka in pursuit of their demand for a
‘Tamil Elam’ or separate country for the Tamilians of Sri Lanka. At one point of time, the northeastern part of Sri Lanka was controlled by LTTE.
The Sri Lankan problem involves people of Indian origin, and there was considerable pressure from the Tamil people in India to the effect that the
Indian government should protect the interests of the Tamils in Sri
Lanka. The government of India has from time to time tried to negotiate with the Sri Lankan government on the Tamil question.
But in 1987, the government of
India for the first time got directly involved in the Sri Lankan Tamil question. India signed an accord with Sri Lanka and sent
