Contemporary World Politics 44
E x e r c i s e s
2. Which among the following statements about South Asia is wrong?
a) All the countries in South Asia are democratic.
b) Bangladesh and India have signed an agreement on river-water sharing.
c) SAFTA was signed at the 12th SAARC Summit in Islamabad.
d) The US and China play an influential role in South Asian politics.
3. What are some of the commonalities and differences between
Bangladesh and Pakistan in their democratic experiences?
4. List three challenges to democracy in Nepal.
5. Name the principal players in the ethnic conflict in Sri Lanka. How do you assess the prospects of the resolution of this conflict?
6. Mention some of the recent agreements between India and Pakistan.
Can we be sure that the two countries are well on their way to a friendly relationship?
7. Mention two areas each of cooperation and disagreement between
India and Bangladesh.
8. How are the external powers influencing bilateral relations in South
Asia? Take any one example to illustrate your point.
9. Write a short note on the role and the limitations of SAARC as a forum for facilitating economic cooperation among the South Asian countries.
10. India’s neighbours often think that the Indian government tries to dominate and interfere in the domestic affairs of the smaller countries of the region. Is this a correct impression?
Reprint 2026-27
O verview
In this chapter we shall discuss the role of international organisations after the collapse of the Soviet
Union. We shall examine how, in this emerging world, there were calls for the restructuring of international organisations to cope with various new challenges including the rise of US power.
The potential reform of the United
Nations Security Council is an interesting case of the reform process and its difficulties. We then turn to India’s involvement in the UN and its view of Security
Council reforms. The chapter closes by asking if the UN can play any role in dealing with a world dominated by one superpower.
In this chapter we also look at some other trans-national organisations that are playing a crucial role.
Chapter 4
International Organisations
This is the United Nations’ logo. The emblem has a world map with olive branches around it, signifying world peace.
Credit : www.un.org
Reprint 2026-27
Contemporary World Politics 46
Why InternatIonal organIsatIons?
Read the two cartoons on this page. Both the cartoons comment on the ineffectiveness of the
United Nations Organisation, usually referred to as the UN, in the Lebanon crisis in 2006. Both the cartoons represent the kind of opinions that we often hear about
On the other hand, we also find that the UN is generally regarded as the most important international organisation in today’s world. In the eyes of many people all over the world, it is indispensable and represents the great hope of humanity for peace and progress. Why do we then need organisations like the UN?
Let us hear two insiders:
“The United Nations was not created to take humanity to heaven, but to save it from hell.”
— Dag Hammarskjold, the UN’s second Secretary-General.
“Talking shop? Yes, there are a lot of speeches and meetings at the U.N., especially during the annual sessions of the General
Assembly. But as Churchill put it, jaw-jaw is better than war-war.
Isn’t it better to have one place where all… countries in the world can get together, bore each other sometimes with their words rather than bore holes into each other on the battlefield?” — Shashi Tharoor, the former UN Under -Secretary-
General for Communications and
Public Information.
These two quotes suggest s o m e t h i n g i m p o r t a n t .
International organisations are not the answer to everything, but they are important. International organisations help with matters of war and peace. They also help countries cooperate to make better living conditions for us all.
Countries have conflicts and differences with each other. That does not necessarily mean they must go to war to deal with their
That’s what they say about the parliament too — a talking shop. Does it mean that we need talking shops?
During June 2006, Israel attacked Lebanon, saying that it was necessary to control the militant group called Hezbollah.
Large numbers of civilians were killed and many public buildings and even residential areas came under Israeli bombardment. The UN passed a resolution on this only in August and the Israel army withdrew from the region only in
October. Both these cartoons comment on the role of the UN and its Secretary-General in this episode.
© Harry Harrison,
Cagle Cartoons Inc.
© Petar Pismestrovic,
Cagle Cartoons Inc.
Reprint 2026-27
International Organisations 47 antagonisms. They can, instead, discuss contentious issues and find peaceful solutions; indeed, even though this is rarely noticed, most conflicts and differences are resolved without going to war. The role of an international organisation can be important in this context. An international organisation is not a super-state with authority over its members.
It is created by and responds to states. It comes into being when states agree to its creation. Once created, it can help member states resolve their problems peacefully.
International organisations are helpful in another way.
Nations can usually see that there are some things they must do together. There are issues that are so challenging that they can only be dealt with when everyone works together. Disease is an example. Some diseases can only be eradicated if everyone in the world cooperates in inoculating or vaccinating their populations. Or take global warming and its effects.
As temperatures rise because of the increase in greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, there is a danger that sea levels will also rise, thereby submerging many coastal areas of the world including huge cities. Of course, each country can try to find its own solution to the effects of global warming. But in the end a more effective approach is to stop the warming itself. This requires at least all of the major industrial powers to cooperate.
Unfortunately, recognising the need for cooperation and actually cooperating are two different things. Nations can recognise the need to cooperate but cannot always agree on how best to do so, how to share the costs of cooperating, how to make sure that the benefits of cooperating are justly divided, and how to ensure that others do not break their end of the bargain and cheat on an agreement. An international organisation can help produce information and ideas about how to cooperate.
It can provide mechanisms, rules and a bureaucracy, to help members have more confidence that costs will be shared properly, that the benefits
Make a list of issues or problems (other than the ones mentioned in the text) that cannot be handled by any one country and require an international organisation.
The International Monetary
Fund (IMF) is an international organisation that oversees those financial institutions and regula- tions that act at the international level. The IMF has 190 member countries (as on 19 Febuary 2024) but they do not enjoy an equal say. The G-7 members
US (16.52%), Japan (6.15%), Germany (5.32%),
France (4.03%), UK (4.03%), Italy (3.02%) and
Canada (2.22%) have 41.29% of the votes.
China (6.09%), India (2.64%), Russia (2.59%)
Brazil (2.22%) and Saudi Arabia (2.02%) are the other major members.
Reprint 2026-27
Contemporary World Politics 48 will be fairly divided, and that once a member joins an agreement it will honour the terms and conditions of the agreement.
With the end of the Cold War, we can see that the UN may have a slightly different role.
As the United States and its allies emerged victorious, there was concer n amongst many governments and peoples that the Western countries led by the US would be so powerful that there would be no check against their wishes and desires.
Can the UN serve to promote dialogue and discussion with the
US in particular, and could it limit the power of the American government? We shall try to answer this question at the end of the chapter.
evolutIon of the un
The First World War encouraged t h e w o r l d t o i n v e s t i n a n international organisation to deal with conflict. Many believed that such an organisation would help the world to avoid war. As a result, the League of Nations was born. However, despite its initial success, it could not prevent the
Second World War (1939-45).
Many more people died and were wounded in this war than ever
The UN was founded as a successor to the League of
Nations. It was established in
1945 immediately after the
S e c o n d W o r l d W a r . T h e
1941 August: Signing of the Atlantic Charter by the US
President Franklin D. Roosevelt and British PM Winston S.
Churchill
1942 January: 26 Allied nations fighting against the Axis
Powers meet in Washington, D.C., to support the Atlantic
Charter and sign the ‘Declaration by United Nations’
1943 December: Tehran Conference Declaration of the
Three Powers (US, Britain and Soviet Union)
1945 February: Yalta Conference of the ‘Big Three’ (Roosevelt, Churchill and Stalin) decides to organise a United
Nations conference on the proposed world organisation
April-May: The 2-month long United Nations Conference on
International Organisation at San Francisco
1945 June 26: Signing of the UN Charter by 50 nations (Poland signed on October 15; so the UN has 51 original founding members)
1945 October 24: the UN was founded (hence October 24 is celebrated as UN Day)
1945 October 30: India joins the UN
The US Office of War Information created the above poster during the Second World War as per the
Declaration by United Nations of 1942.
The poster features the flags of all nations that were part of the Allied
Forces. It reflects the belligerent origins of the UN.
FOUNDING OF THE UNITED NATIONS
Reprint 2026-27
International Organisations 49
Adapted from http://www.newint.org/issue375/pics/un-map-big.gif
For more details about the UN System, visit www.un.org
Reprint 2026-27
Contemporary World Politics 50 organisation was set up through the signing of the United Nations
Charter by 51 states. It tried to achieve what the League could not between the two world wars.
The UN’s objective is to prevent international conflict and to facilitate cooperation among states. It was founded with the hope that it would act to stop the conflicts between states escalating into war and, if war broke out, to limit the extent of hostilities.
Furthermore, since conflicts often arose from the lack of social and economic development, the UN was intended to bring countries together to improve the prospects of social and economic development all over the world.
By 2011, the UN had 193 member states. These includeed almost all independent states.
In the UN General Assembly, all members have one vote each. In the UN Security Council, there are five permanent members.
These are: the United States,
Russia, the United Kingdom,
France and China. These states were selected as per manent members as they were the most powerful immediately after the
Second World War and because they constituted the victors in the War.
The UN’s most visible public figure, and the representative head, is the Secretary-General.
The present Secretary-General is António Guterres. He is the ninth Secretary-General of the
UN. He took over as the Secretary-
General on 1 January 2017. He was the Prime Minister of Portugal (1995-2002) and the UN High
Commissioner for Refugees (2005-2015).
The UN consists of many d i f f e r e n t s t r u c t u r e s a n d agencies. War and peace and differences between member states are discussed in the
General Assembly as well as the Security Council. Social and economic issues are dealt with by many agencies including the World Health Organisation (WHO), the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Human Rights
Commision (UNHRC), the United
Nations High Commission for
Refugees (UNHCR), the United
N a t i o n s C h i l d r e n ’ s F u n d (UNICEF), and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific, and
Cultural Organisation (UNESCO), among others.
reform of the un after the Cold War
Reform and improvement are fundamental to any organisation to serve the needs of a changing environment. The UN is no exception. In recent years, there have been demands for reform of the world body. However, there is little clarity and consensus on the nature of reform.
Two basic kinds of reforms face the UN: r efor m of the organisation’s structures and pr ocesses; and a r eview of the issues that fall within the jurisdiction of the organisation.
Almost everyone is agreed that both aspects of refor m are
Cold War or no
Cold War, one reform is needed above all. Only democratic leaders should be allowed to represent their countries in the UN.
How can they allow dictators to speak in the name of the people of their country?
Search for at least one news item about the activities of each of the
UN agencies mentioned on this page.
Reprint 2026-27
International Organisations 51 necessary. What they cannot agree on is precisely what is to be done, how it is to be done, and when it is to be done.
On the reform of structures and pr ocesses, the biggest discussion has been on the functioning of the Security
Council. Related to this has been the demand for an increase in the UN Security Council’s permament and non-permanent membership so that the realities of contemporary world politics are better reflected in the structure of the organisation. In particular, there are proposals to increase membership from Asia, Africa and
South America. Beyond this, the
US and other Western countries want improvements in the UN’s budgetary procedures and its administration.
On the issues to be given greater priority or to be brought within the jurisdiciton of the UN, some countries and experts want the organisation to play a greater or more effective role in peace and security missions, while others want its role to be confined to development and humanitarian w o r k ( h e a l t h , e d u c a t i o n , environment, population control, human rights, gender and social justice).
Let us look at both sets of reforms, with an emphasis on reform of the structures and processes.
The UN was established in 1945 immediately after the
Second World War. The way it
Trygve Lie (1946-1952) Norway; lawyer and foreign minister; worked for ceasefire between India and
Pakistan on Kashmir; criticised for his failure to quickly end the Korean war; Soviet Union opposed second term for him; resigned from the post.
Dag Hammarskjöld (1953-1961) Sweden; Economist and lawyer; worked for resolving the Suez Canal dispute and the decolonisation of Africa; awarded
Nobel Peace Prize posthumously in 1961 for his efforts to settle the Congo crisis; Soviet Union and
France criticised his role in Africa.
U Thant (1961-1971) Burma (Myanmar); teacher and diplomat; worked for resolving the Cuban Missile
Crisis and ending the Congo crisis; established the
UN Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus; criticised the US during the Vietnam War.
Kurt Waldheim (1972-1981) Austria; diplomat and foreign minister; made efforts to resolve the problems of Namibia and Lebanon; oversaw the relief operation in Bangladesh; China blocked his bid for a third term.
Javier Perez de Cuellar (1982-1991) Peru; lawyer and diplomat; worked for peace in Cyprus, Afghanistan and El Salvador; mediated between Britain and
Argentina after the Falklands War; negotiated for the independence of Namibia.
Boutros Boutros-Ghali (1992-1996) Egypt; diplomat, jurist, foreign minister; issued a report, An Agenda for Peace; conducted a successful UN operation in
Mozambique; blamed for the UN failures in Bosnia,
Somalia and Rwanda; due to serious disagreements, the US blocked a second term for him.
Kofi A. Annan (1997-2006) Ghana; UN official;
created the Global Fund to fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria; declared the US-led invasion of Iraq as an illegal act; established the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Human Rights Council in 2005;
awarded the 2001 Nobel Peace Prize.
Ban Ki-moon (2007-2016) Republic of Korea (South
Korea); diplomat and foreign minister; the second
Asian to hold the post; highlighted climate change;
focused on the Millennium Development Goals and Sustainable Development Goals; worked for the creation of UN Women; emphasised conflict resolution and nuclear disarmament.
António Manuel de Oliveira Guterres (2017- )
Portugal; former Prime Minister of Portugal from 1995 to 2002; was the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees during 2005–2015; President of the
Socialist International from 1999 to 2005. He is serving as the ninth Secretary–General of the United Nations.
Photo Credit: www.un.org
UN SECRETARIES-GENERAL
Reprint 2026-27
Contemporary World Politics 52 was organised and the way it functioned reflected the realities of world politics after the Second
World War. After the Cold War, those realities are different. Here are some of the changes that have occurred:
T h e S o v i e t U n i o n h a s collapsed.
The US is the strongest power.
The relationship between
Russia, the successor to the
Soviet Union, and the US is much more cooperative.
China is fast emerging as a great power, and India also is growing rapidly.
The economies of Asia are growing at an unprecedented
Many new countries have joined the UN (as they became independent from the Soviet
Union or former communist states in eastern Europe).
A whole new set of challenges confronts the world (genocide, civil war, ethnic conflict, terrorism, nuclear proliferation, climate change, environmental degradation, epidemics).
In this situation, in 1989, as the Cold War was ending, the question facing the world was:
is the UN doing enough? Is it equipped to do what is required?
What should it be doing? And how? What reforms are necessary to make it work better? For the past decade and a half, member states have been trying to find satisf
