Contemporary World Politics 78
 Narrate the following imaginary situation of four villages settled on the banks of a river.
Kotabagh, Gewali, Kandali and Goppa are villages adjoining each other beside a river. People in Kotabagh were the first settlers on the riverbank. They had an uninterrupted access to abundant natural resources available in the region.
Gradually, people from different regions started coming to this region because of the abundant natural resources and water. Now there are four villages. With time the population of these villages expanded. But resources did not expand. Each village started making claims over natural resources including the boundary of their respective settlement. Inhabitants of Kotabagh argued for a greater share in natural resources, as they were the first settlers. Settlers of Kandali and Gewali said that as they have bigger populations than the others they both need a greater share. The people of Goppa said as they are used to an extravagant life they need a bigger share, though their population is smaller in size. All four villages disagreed with each other’s demands and continued to use the resources as they wished. This led to frequent clashes among the villagers. Gradually, everybody felt disgusted with the state of affairs and lost their peace of mind. Now they all wish to live the way they had lived earlier. But they do not know how to go back to that golden age.
 Make a brief note describing the characteristics of each village — the description should reflect the actual nature of present-day nations.
 Divide the classroom into four groups. Each group is to represent a village. Hand over the village notes to the respective groups.
 The teacher is to allot a time (15 minutes) for group discussions on how to go back to the golden age. Each should develop its own strategy.
All groups are to negotiate freely among themselves as village representatives, to arrive at a solution (within 20 minutes). Each would put forth its arguments and counter arguments. The result could be: an amicable agreement accommodating the demands of all, which seldom happens; or, the entire negotiation/discussion ends without achieving the purpose.
Ideas for the Teacher
 Link the villages to nations and connect to the problems of security (threat to geographical territory/ access to natural resources/insurgency, and so on).
 Talk about the observations made during the negotiation and explain how similarly the nations behave while negotiating on related issues.
 The activity could be concluded by making reference to some of the current security issues between and among nations.
Reprint 2026-27
Security in the Contemporary World 79
1. Match the terms with their meaning:
i. Confidence Building Measures (CBMs)
ii. Arms Control iii. Alliance iv. Disarmament a. Giving up certain types of weapons b. A process of exchanging information on defence matters between nations on a regular basis c. A coalition of nations meant to deter or defend against military d. Regulates the acquisition or development of weapons
2. Which among the following would you consider as a traditional security concern / non-traditional security concern / not a threat?
a. The spread of chikungunya / dengue fever b. Inflow of workers from a neighbouring nation c. Emergence of a group demanding nationhood for their region d. Emergence of a group demanding autonomy for their region e. A newspaper that is critical of the armed forces in the country
3. What is the difference between traditional and non-traditional security? Which category would the creation and sustenance of alliances belong to?
4. What are the differences in the threats that people in the Third World face and those living in the First World face?
5. Is terrorism a traditional or non-traditional threat to security?
6. What are the choices available to a state when its security is threatened, according to the traditional security perspective?
7. What is ‘Balance of Power’? How could a state achieve this?
8. What are the objectives of military alliances? Give an example of a functioning military alliance with its specific objectives.
9. Rapid environmental degradation is causing a serious threat to security. Do you agree with the statement? Substantiate your arguments.
E x e r c i s e s
Reprint 2026-27
Contemporary World Politics 80
10. Nuclear weapons as deterrence or defence have limited usage against contemporary security threats to states. Explain the statement.
11. Looking at the Indian scenario, what type of security has been given priority in India, traditional or non-traditional? What examples could you cite to substantiate the argument?
12. Read the cartoon below and write a short note in favour or against the connection between war and terrorism depicted in this cartoon.
E x e r c i s e s
© Ares, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
Reprint 2026-27
O verview
This chapter examines the growing significance of environmental as well as resource issues in world politics. It analyses in a comparative perspective some of the important environmental movements against the backdrop of the rising profile of environmentalism from the 1960s onwar ds. Notions of common property resources and the global commons too are assessed. We also discuss, in brief, the stand taken by India in more recent environmental debates. Next follows a brief account of the geopolitics of resource competition. We conclude by taking note of the indigenous peoples’ voices and concerns from the margins of contemporary world politics.
Chapter 6
Environment and
Natural Resources
The 1992 Earth Summit has brought environmental issues to the centre-stage of global politics. The pictures above show rainforest and mangroves.
Reprint 2026-27
Contemporary World Politics 82
E nvironmEntal ConCErns in Global PolitiCs
In this book we have discussed
‘world politics’ in a fairly limited sense: wars and treaties, rise and decline of state power, the relationship between the governments that represent their countries in the international arena and the role of inter- governmental organisations. In
Chapter 5, we expanded the scope of world politics to include issues like poverty and epidemics. That may not have been a very difficult step to take, for we all think that governments are responsible for controlling these. In that sense they fall within the scope of world politics. Now consider some other issues. Do you think they fall within the scope of contemporary world politics?
T h r o u g h o u t t h e w o r l d , cultivable area is barely expanding any more, and a substantial portion of existing agricultural land is losing fertility. Grasslands have been overgrazed and fisheries over- harvested. Water bodies have suffered extensive depletion a n d p o l l u t i o n , s e v e r e l y restricting food production.
According to the Human
Development Report 2016 of the
United Nations Development
Programme, 663 million people in developing countries have no access to safe water and
2.4 billion have no access to sanitation, resulting in the death of more than three million children every year.
Natural forests — which help stabilise the climate, moderate water supplies, and harbour a majority of the planet’s biodiversity on land— are being cut down and people are being displaced. The loss of biodiversity continues due to the destruction of habitat in areas which are rich in species.
A steady decline in the total amount of ozone in the Earth’s s t r a t o s p h e r e ( c o m m o n l y referred to as the ozone hole) poses a real danger to ecosystems and human
C o a s t a l p o l l u t i o n t o o i s increasing globally. Although the open sea is relatively clean, the coastal waters are
Politics in forests, politics in water, politics in atmosphere! What is not political then?
Around the Aral Sea, thousands of people have had to leave their homes as the toxic waters have totally destroyed the fishing industry.
The shipping industry and all related activities have collapsed.
Rising concentrations of salt in the soil have caused low crop yields.
Numerous studies have been conducted. In fact locals joke that if everyone who’d come to study the Aral had brought a bucket of water, the sea would be full by now. Source: www.gobartimes.org
Reprint 2026-27
83 Environment and N atural R esources becoming increasingly polluted largely due to land-based activities. If unchecked, intensive human settlement of coastal zones across the globe will lead to further deterioration in the quality of marine environment.
You might ask are we not talking here about ‘natural phenomena’ that should be studied in geography rather than in political science. But think about it again. If the various governments take steps to check e n v i r o n m e n t a l d e g r a d a t i o n of the kind mentioned above, these issues will have political consequences in that sense.
Most of them are such that no single government can address them fully. Therefore they have to become part of ‘world politics’.
Issues of environment and natural resources are political in another deeper sense. Who causes environmental degradation?
Who pays the price? And who is responsible for taking corrective action? Who gets to use how much of the natural resources of the Earth? All these raise the issue of who wields how much power. They are, therefore, deeply political questions.
A l t h o u g h e n v i r o n m e n t a l concerns have a long history, awareness of the environmental consequences of economic growth acquired an increasingly political character from the 1960s onwards.
The Club of Rome, a global think tank, published a book in
1972 entitled Limits to Growth, dramatising the potential depletion of the Earth’s resources against the backdrop of rapidly growing world population. International agencies, including the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP), began holding international conferences and promoting detailed studies to get a more coordinated and effective response to environmental problems. Since then, the environment has emerged as a significant issue of global politics.
T h e g r o w i n g f o c u s o n environmental issues within the arena of global politics was firmly consolidated at the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in June
1992. This was also called the
Earth Summit. The summit was
Collect news clippings on reports environment and politics in your own locality.
Global Warming © Ares, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
Why do you think the fingers are designed like chimneys and the world made into a lighter?
Reprint 2026-27
Contemporary World Politics 84 attended by 170 states, thousands of NGOs and many multinational corporations. Five years earlier, the 1987 Brundtland Report, Our
Common Future, had warned that traditional patterns of economic growth were not sustainable in the long term, especially in view of the demands of the South for further industrial development. What was obvious at the Rio Summit was that the rich and developed countries of the First World, generally referred to as the ‘global
North’ were pursuing a different environmental agenda than the poor and developing countries of the Third World, called the ‘global
South’. Whereas the Northern states were concerned with ozone depletion and global warming, the
Southern states were anxious to address the relationship between economic development and environmental management.
The Rio Summit produced conventions dealing with climate change, biodiversity, forestry, and recommended a list of development practices called ‘Agenda 21’. But it left unresolved considerable differences and difficulties. There was a consensus on combining economic growth with ecological responsibility. This approach to development is commonly known as ‘sustainable development’.
The problem however was how exactly this was to be achieved.
Some critics have pointed out that Agenda 21 was biased in favour of economic growth rather than ensuring ecological conservation. Let us look at some of the contentious issues in the global politics of environment.
thE ProtECtion of Global
‘Commons’ are those resources which are not owned by anyone but rather shared by a community.
This could be a ‘common room’, a
‘community centre’, a park or a river. Similarly, there are some
Are there different perspectives from which the rich and the poor countries agree to protect the Earth?
© Ares, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
Reprint 2026-27
85 Environment and N atural R esources areas or regions of the world which are located outside the sovereign jurisdiction of any one state, and therefore require common governance by the international community. These are known as res communis humanitatis or global commons. They include the earth’s atmosphere, Antarctica (see Box), the ocean floor, and outer space.
Cooperation over the global commons is not easy. There have been many path-breaking agreements such as the 1959
Antarctic Treaty, the 1987 Montreal
Protocol, and the 1991 Antarctic
Environmental Protocol. A major problem underlying all ecological issues relates to the difficulty of achieving consensus on common environmental agendas on the
Very soon we will have ecological degradation of the
The Antarctic continental region extends over 14 million square kilometres and comprises 26 per cent of the world’s wilderness area, representing 90 per cent of all terrestrial ice and 70 per cent of planetary fresh water. The Antarctic also extends to a further 36 million square kilometres of ocean. It has a limited terrestrial life and a highly productive marine ecosystem, comprising a few plants (e.g. microscopic algae, fungi and lichen), marine mammals, fish and hordes of birds adapted to harsh conditions, as well as the krill, which is central to marine food chain and upon which other animals are dependent. The Antarctic plays an important role in maintaining climatic equilibrium, and deep ice cores provide an important source of information about greenhouse gas concentrations and atmospheric temperatures of hundreds and thousands of years ago.
Who owns this coldest, farthest, and windiest continent on globe? There are two claims about it. Some countries like the UK, Argentina, Chile, Norway, France, Australia and New Zealand have made legal claims to sovereign rights over Antarctic territory. Most other states have taken the opposite view that the Antarctic is a part of the global commons and not subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of any state.
These differences, however, have not prevented the adoption of innovative and potentially far-reaching rules for the protection of the Antarctic environment and its ecosystem. The Antarctic and the Arctic polar regions are subjected to special regional rules of environmental protection. Since 1959, activities in the area have been limited to scientific research, fishing and tourism. Even these limited activities have not prevented parts of the region from being degraded by waste as a result of oil spills.
ANTARCTICA
Reprint 2026-27
Contemporary World Politics 86 basis of vague scientific evidence and time frames. In that sense the discovery of the ozone hole over the Antarctic in the mid-1980s revealed the opportunity as well as dangers inherent in tackling global environmental problems.
Similarly, the history of outer space as a global commons shows that the management of these areas is thoroughly influenced by North-South inequalities.
As with the earth’s atmosphere and the ocean floor, the crucial issue here is technology and industrial development. This is important because the benefits of exploitative activities in outer space are far from being equal either for the present or future generations.
Common but DiffErEntiatED rEsPonsibilitiEs
We have noted above a difference in the approach to environment between the countries of the North
One of the biggest catastrophes in Africa in the 1970s, a drought turned the best cropland in five countries into cracked and barren earth. In fact, the term environmental refugees came into popular vocabulary after this. Many had to flee their homelands as agriculture was no longer possible. Source: www.gobartimes.org
Find out more about the
Kyoto Protocol.
Which major countries did not sign it? And
Reprint 2026-27
87 Environment and N atural R esources and the South. The developed countries of the North want to discuss the environmental issue as it stands now and want everyone to be equally responsible for ecological conservation. The developing countries of the South feel that much of the ecological degradation in the world is the product of industrial development undertaken by the developed countries. If they have caused more degradation, they must also take more responsibility for undoing the damage now. Moreover, the developing countries are in the process of industrialisation and they must not be subjected to the same restrictions, which apply to the developed countries.
Thus the special needs of the d e v e l o p i n g c o u n t r i e s m u s t be taken into account in the development, application, and interpretation of rules of inter- national environmental law.
This argument was accepted in the Rio Declaration at the Earth
Summit in 1992 and is called the principle of ‘common but differentiated responsibilities’.
The relevant part of the Rio
Declaration says that “States shall cooperate in the spirit of global partnership to conserve, protect and restore the health and integrity of the Earth’s e c o s y s t e m . I n v i e w o f t h e different contributions of global environmental degradation, states have common but differentiated responsibilities. The developed c o u n t r i e s a c k n o w l e d g e t h e responsibility that they bear in the international pursuit of sustainable development in view of the pressures their societies place on the global environment and of the technological and financial resources they command.”
The 1992 United Nations
F r a m e w o r k C o n v e n t i o n
