Contemporary World Politics 96
In the context of world politics, what are the common interests of approximately 30 crore indigenous peoples spread throughout the world including India? There are 20 lakh indigenous people of the Cordillera region of the
Philippines, 10 lakh Mapuche people of Chile, six lakh tribal people of the Chittagong Hill
Tracts in Bangladesh, 35 lakh
North American natives, 50,000
Kuna living east of Panama Canal and 10 lakh Small Peoples of the
Soviet North. Like other social movements, indigenous people speak of their struggles, their agenda and their rights.
The indigenous voices in world politics call for the admission of indigenous people to the world community as equals.
Indigenous people occupy areas in Central and South America,
Africa, India (where they are known as Tribals) and Southeast
Asia. Many of the present day
Why don’t we hear much about the indigenous people and their movements? Is the media biased against island states in the Oceania region (including Australia and
New Zealand), were inhabited by the Polynesian, Melanesian and Micronesian people over the course of thousands of years.
They appeal to governments to come to terms with the continuing existence of indigenous nations as enduring communities with an identity of their own. ‘Since times immemorial’ is the phrase used by indigenous people all over the world to refer to their continued occupancy of the lands from which they originate. The worldviews of indigenous societies, irrespective of their geographical location, are strikingly similar with respect to land and the variety of life systems supported by it. The loss of land, which also means the loss of an economic resource base, is the most obvious threat
Spoonful of Ecology
Do you agree with this perspective where a man from an urban (developed!) area becomes greedy for nature?
© Ares, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
Reprint 2026-27
97 Environment and N atural R esources to the survival of indigenous people. Can political autonomy be enjoyed without its attachment to the means of physical survival?
In India, the description
‘indigenous people’ is usually applied to the Scheduled Tribes who constitute nearly eight per cent of the population of the country. With the exception of small communities of hunters and gatherers, most indigenous populations in India depend for their subsistence primarily on the cultivation of land. For centuries, if not millennia, they had free access to as much land as they could cultivate. It was only after the establishment of the British colonial rule that areas, which had previously been inhabited by the Scheduled Tribe communities, were subjected to outside forces. Although they enjoy a constitutional protection in political representation, they have not got much of the benefits of development in the country. In fact they have paid a huge cost for development since they are the single largest group among the people displaced by various developmental projects since independence.
Issues related to the rights of the indigenous communities have been neglected in domestic and international politics for very long. During the 1970s, growing international contacts among indigenous leaders from around the world aroused a sense of common concern and shared experiences. The World Council of Indigenous Peoples was formed in 1975. The
Council became subsequently the first of 11 indigenous NGOs to receive consultative status in the UN. Many of the movements against globalisation, discussed in Chapter 7, have focussed on the rights of the indigenous people.
 Each student is asked to list any ten items they consume/use every day.
(The list could include — pen/paper/eraser/ computer/water etc.)
 Ask students to calculate the amount of natural resources being used to make these items. (For finished products like pen/pencil/computer etc., students will calculate the amount of resources and for items like water they could calculate the amount of electricity used for purifying and pumping along with gallons of water). Each would calculate and arrive at an approximate
Ideas for the Teacher
 Collect the approximate figures from each student and sum up all to arrive at total resources consumed by the students of that particular class. (Teacher is to act as a facilitator and allow students to do the calculations.)
 Project this figure to other classes of the same school, then to schools across the country. The country figure could be used to measure the amount of resources being used by schools in other countries too. (The teacher is to have background information about the resources being used by students in a few select countries. While selecting countries, teacher should ensure that the selected countries belong to the developed / developing countries category).
 Ask students to imagine the amount of resources we are consuming and also to estimate future consumption.
Reprint 2026-27
Contemporary World Politics 98
1. Which among the following best explains the reason for growing concerns about the environment?
a. The developed countries are concerned about protecting nature.
b. Protection of the environment is vital for indigenous people and natural habitats.
c. The environmental degradation caused by human activities has become pervasive and has reached a dangerous level.
d. None of the above.
2. Mark correct or wrong against each of the following statements about the Earth Summit:
a. It was attended by 170 countries, thousands of NGOs and many b. The summit was held under the aegis of the UN.
c. For the first time, global environmental issues were firmly consolidated at the political level.
d. It was a summit meeting.
3. Which among the following are TRUE about the global commons?
a. The Earth’s atmosphere, Antarctica, ocean floor and outer space are considered as part of the global commons.
b. The global commons are outside sovereign jurisdiction.
c. The question of managing the global commons has reflected the
North-South divide.
d. The countries of the North are more concerned about the protection of the global commons than the countries of the South.
4. What were the outcomes of the Rio Summit?
5. What is meant by the global commons? How are they exploited and polluted?
6. What is meant by ‘common but differentiated responsibilities’? How could we implement the idea?
7. Why have issues related to global environmental protection become the priority concern of states since the 1990s?
8. Compromise and accommodation are the two essential policies required by states to save planet Earth. Substantiate the statement in the light of the ongoing negotiations between the North and South on environmental issues.
9. The most serious challenge before the states is pursuing economic development without causing further damage to the global environment. How could we achieve this? Explain with a few examples.
E x e r c i s e s
Reprint 2026-27
O verview
In this final chapter of the book we look at globalisation, something that has been referred to in many chapters of this book and textbooks of many other subjects.
We begin by analysing the concept of globalisation and then examine its causes. We then discuss at length the political, economic and cultural consequences of globalisation. Our interest is also in studying the impact of globalisation on India as well as how India is affecting globalisation. We finally draw attention to resistance to globalisation and how social movements in India also form part of this resistance.
Chapter 7
Globalisation
Reprint 2026-27
Contemporary World Politics 100
The ConCepT of
GlobalisaTion
Janardhan works in a call centre.
He leaves late in the evening for work, becomes John when he enters his office, acquires a new accent and speaks a different language (than he does when he is at home) to communicate with his clients who are living thousands of miles away. He works all night, which is actually day time for his overseas customers. Janardhan is rendering a service to somebody who in all probability he is never likely to meet physically. This is his daily routine. His holidays also do not correspond to the
Indian calendar but to those of his clients who happen to be from
Ramdhari has gone shopping to buy a birthday gift for his nine-year old daughter. He has promised her a small cycle and decides to search the market for something he finds affordable as well as of reasonable quality. He finally does buy a cycle, which is actually manufactured in China but is being marketed in India.
It meets his requirements of quality as well as affordability, and Ramdhari decides to go ahead with his purchase. Last year, Ramdhari on his daughter’s insistence had bought her a
Barbie doll, which was originally manufactured in the US but was being sold in India.
Sarika is a first generation learner who has done remarkably well throughout her school and college life by working very hard.
She now has an opportunity to take on a job and begin an independent career, which the women of her family had never dreamt of earlier. While some of her relatives are opposed, she finally decides to go ahead because of the new opportunities that have been made available to her generation.
All three examples illustrate an aspect each of what we call globalisation. In the first instance
Janardhan was participating in the globalisation of services.
Ramdhari’s birthday purchases tell us something about the movement of commodities from one part of the world to another.
Sarika is faced with a conflict of values partly originating from a new opportunity that earlier was not available to the women in her family but today is part of a reality that has gained wider acceptability.
If we look for examples of the use of the term ‘globalisation’ in real life, we will realise that it is used in various contexts. Let us look at some examples, different from the ones that we have looked
Some far mers committed suicide because their crops failed. They had bought very expensive seeds supplied by a multinational company
An Indian company bought a major rival company based in Europe, despite protests by some of the current owners.
So many Nepalese workers come to
India to work. Is that globalisation?
Go through newspapers for a week and collect clippings on anything related to globalisation.
Reprint 2026-27
Globalisation 101
Many retail shopkeepers fear that they would lose their livelihoods if some major international companies open retail chains in the country.
A film producer in Mumbai was accused of lifting the story of his film from another film made in Hollywood.
A militant group issued a statement threatening college g i r l s w h o w e a r w e s t e r n clothes.
These examples show us that globalisation need not always be positive; it can have negative consequences for the people.
Indeed, there are many who believe that globalisation has more negative consequences than positive. These examples also show us that globalisation need not be only about the economic issues, nor is the direction of influence always from the rich to the poor countries.
Since much of the usage tends to be imprecise, it becomes important to clarify what we mean by globalisation. Globalisation as a concept fundamentally deals with flows. These flows could be of various kinds — ideas moving from one part of the world to another, capital shunted between two or more places, commodities being traded across borders, and people moving in search of better livelihoods to different parts of the world. The crucial element is the
‘worldwide interconnectedness’ that is created and sustained as a consequence of these constant
Much of the Chinese stuff that comes to
India is smuggled.
Does globalisation lead to smuggling?
T h i s c h a p t e r h a s a series of images a b o u t p o l i t i c a l , e c o n o m i c a n d cultural aspects of globalisation, taken from different parts of the world.
Reprint 2026-27
Contemporary World Politics 102
Globalisation is a multi- dimensional concept. It has political, economic and cultural manifestations, and these must be adequately distinguished. It is wrong to assume that globalisation has purely economic dimensions, just as it would also be mistaken to assume that it is a purely cultural phenomenon. The impact of globalisation is vastly uneven — it affects some societies more than others and some parts of some societies more than others — and it is important to avoid drawing general conclusions about the impact of globalisation without paying sufficient attention to specific contexts.
Causes of GlobalisaTion
What accounts for globalisation?
If globalisation is about the flows of ideas, capital, commodities, and people, it is perhaps logical to ask if there is anything novel about this phenomenon.
Globalisation in terms of these four flows has taken place through much of human history. However, those who argue that there is something distinct about contemporary globalisation point out that it is the scale and speed of these flows that account for the uniqueness of globalisation in the contemporary era.
Globalisation has a strong historical basis, and it is important to view contem- porary flows against this backdrop.
While globalisation is not caused by any single factor, technology remains a critical element. There is no doubt that the invention of the telegraph, the telephone, and the microchip i n m o r e r e c e n t t i m e s h a s revolutionised communication between different parts of the world. When printing initially came into being it laid the basis for the creation of nationalism.
So also today we should expect that technology will affect the way we think of our personal but also our collective lives.
The ability of ideas, capital, commodities and people to move more easily from one part of the world to another has been made possible largely by technological advances. The pace of these flows may vary. For instance, the movement of capital and commodities will most likely be quicker and wider than the movement of peoples across different parts of the world.
Globalisation, however, does not emerge merely because of the availability of improved c o m m u n i c a t i o n s . W h a t i s important is for people in different parts of the world to recognise these interconnections with the rest of the world. Currently, we are aware of the fact that events taking place in one part of the world could have an impact on another part of the world. The
Bird flu or tsunami is not confined to any particular nation. It does not respect national boundaries.
Isn’t globalisation a new name for imperialism? Why do we need a new
Digital Economy
© Ares, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
Reprint 2026-27
Globalisation 103
Similarly, when major economic events take place, their impact is felt outside their immediate local, national or regional environment at the global level.
poliTiCal ConsequenCes
One of the debates that has been generated as a consequence of contemporary processes of globalisation relates to its ongoing political impact. How does globalisation affect traditional conceptions of state sovereignty?
There are at least three aspects that we need to consider when answering this question.
At the most simple level, globalisation results in an erosion of state capacity, that is, the ability of government to do what they do. All over the world, the old
‘welfare state’ is now giving way to a more minimalist state that performs certain core functions such as the maintenance of law and order and the security of its citizens. However, it withdraws from many of its earlier welfare functions directed at economic and social well-being. In place of the welfare state, it is the market that becomes the prime determinant of economic and social priorities. The entry and the increased role of multinational companies all over the world leads to a reduction in the capacity of governments to take decisions on their own.
At the same time, globalisation does not always reduce state capacity. The primacy of the state
Reprint 2026-27
Contemporary World Politics 104 continues to be the unchallenged basis of political community.
The old jealousies and rivalries between countries have not ceased to matter in world politics. The state continues to discharge its essential functions (law and order, national security) and consciously withdraws from certain domains from which it wishes to. States continue to be important.
Indeed, in some respects state capacity has received a boost as a consequence of globalisation, with enhanced technologies available at the disposal of the state to collect information about its citizens. With this information, the state is better able to rule, not less able. Thus, states become more powerful than they were earlier as an outcome of the new technology.
eConomiC ConsequenCes
While everything may not be known about the economic facets of globalisation, this particular dimension shapes a large part of the content and direction of contemporary debates surrounding globalisation.
A part of the problem has to do with defining economic globalisation itself. The mention of economic globalisation draws our attention immediately to the role of international institutions like the IMF and the WTO and the role they play in determining economic policies across the world. Yet, globalisation must not be viewed in such narrow terms. Economic globalisation involves many actors other than these international institutions. A much broader way of understanding of economic globalisation requires us to look at the distribution of economic gains, i.e. who gets the most from globalisation and who gets less, indeed who loses from it.
What is often called economic globalisation usually involves greater economic flows among different countries of the world.
Some of this is voluntary and some forced by international i n s t i t u t i o n s a n d p o w e r f u l countries. As we saw in the examples at the beginning of this chapter, this flow or exchange can take various for
