BEFORE YOU READ
Anneliese Marie ‘Anne’ Frank (12
June 1929 – February/March
1945) was a German – born
Jewish girl who wrote while in hiding with her family and four friends in Amsterdam during the
German occupation of the
Netherlands in World War II. Her family had moved to Amsterdam after the Nazis gained power in
Germany but were trapped when the Nazi occupation extended into the Netherlands. As persecutions against the Jewish population increased, the family went into hiding in July 1942 in hidden rooms in her father Otto Frank’s office building. After two years in hiding, the group was betrayed and transported to the concentration camp system where Anne died of typhus in Bergen-Belsen within days of her sister, Margot Frank.
Her father, Otto, the only survivor of the group, returned to Amsterdam after the war ended, to find that her diary had been saved. Convinced that it was a unique record, he took action to have it published in
English under the name The Diary of a Young Girl.
The diary was given to Anne Frank for her thirteenth birthday and chronicles the events of her life from 12 June 1942 until its final entry of 1 August 1944. It was eventually translated from its original Dutch into many languages and became one of the world’s most widely read books. There have also been several films, television and theatrical productions, and even an opera, based on the diary. Described as the work of a mature and insightful mind, the diary provides an intimate examination of daily life under Nazi occupation. Anne Frank has become one of the most renowned and discussed of the Holocaust victims.
“This is a photo as I would wish myself to look all the time. Then
I would, maybe, have a chance to come to Hollywood.”
– Anne Frank, 10 October 1942
Reprint 2026-27
2. Here are some entries from personal records. Use the definitions above to decide which of the entries might be from a diary, a journal, a log or a memoir.
(i) I woke up very late today and promptly got a scolding from
Mum! I can’t help it — how can I miss the FIFA World Cup matches?
(ii) 10:30 a.m. Went to the office of the Director
01:00 p.m. Had lunch with Chairman
05:45 p.m. Received Rahul at the airport
09:30 p.m. Dinner at home (iii) The ride to Ooty was uneventful. We rested for a while every
50 km or so, and used the time to capture the magnificent landscape with my HandyCam. From Ooty we went on to
Bangalore.
What a contrast! The noise and pollution of this once-beautiful city really broke my heart.
(iv) This is how Raj Kapoor found me — all wet and ragged outside R.K.Studios. He was then looking for just someone like this for a small role in Mera Naam Joker, and he cast me on the spot. The rest, as they say, is history!
From the Diary of Anne Frank
Activity
1. Do you keep a diary? Given below under ‘A’ are some terms we use to describe a written record of personal experience. Can you match them with their descriptions under ‘B’? (You may look up the terms in a dictionary if you wish.)
– A book with a separate space or page for each day, in which you write down your thoughts and feelings or what has happened on that day
– A full record of a journey, a period of time, or an event, written every day
– A record of a person’s own life and experiences (usually, a famous person)
– A written record of events with times and dates, usually official (i) Journal (ii) Diary (iii) Log (iv) Memoir(s)
Reprint 2026-27
First Flight
WRITING in a diary is a really strange experience for someone like me. Not only because I’ve never written anything before, but also because it seems to me that later on neither I nor anyone else will be interested in the musings of a thirteen-year -old schoolgirl. Oh well, it doesn’t matter. I feel like writing, and I have an even greater need to get all kinds of things off my chest.
‘Paper has more patience than people.’ I thought of this saying on one of those days when I was feeling a little depressed and was sitting at home with my chin in my hands, bored and listless, wondering whether to stay in or go out. I finally stayed where I was, brooding: Yes, paper does have more patience, and since I’m not planning to let anyone else read this stiff-backed notebook grandly referred to as a
‘diary’, unless I should ever find a real friend, it probably won’t make a bit of difference.
Now I’m back to the point that prompted me to keep a diary in the first place: I don’t have a
Let me put it more clearly, since no one will believe that a thirteen-year-old girl is completely alone in the world. And I’m not. I have loving parents and a sixteen-year-old sister, and there are about thirty people I can call friends. I have a family, loving aunts and a good home. No, on the surface I seem to have everything, except my one true friend.
All I think about when I’m with friends is having a good time. I can’t bring myself to talk about anything but ordinary everyday things. We don’t seem to be able to get any closer, and that’s the problem. Maybe it’s my fault that we don’t confide in each other. In any case, that’s just how things are, and unfortunately they’re not liable to change. This is why I’ve started the diary.
To enhance the image of this long-awaited friend in my imagination, I don’t want to jot down the facts in this diary the way most people would do, but I want the diary to be my friend, and I’m going to call this friend ‘Kitty’.
listless with no energy or interest to tell personal things privately to a person that one
Reprint 2026-27
From the Diary of Anne Frank
Oral Comprehension Check
1. What makes writing in a diary a strange experience for Anne Frank?
2. Why does Anne want to keep a diary?
3. Why did Anne think she could confide more in her diary than in people?
Since no one would understand a word of my stories to Kitty if I were to plunge right in, I’d better provide a brief sketch of my life, much as I dislike doing so.
My father, the most adorable father I’ve ever seen, didn’t marry my mother until he was thirty-six and she was twenty-five. My sister, Margot, was born in Frankfurt in Germany in 1926. I was born on 12
June 1929. I lived in Frankfurt until I was four. My father emigrated to Holland in 1933. My mother,
Edith Hollander Frank, went with him to Holland in September, while Margot and I were sent to
Aachen to stay with our grandmother. Margot went to Holland in December, and I followed in February, when I was plunked down on the table as a birthday present for Margot.
I started right away at the Montessori nursery school. I stayed there until I was six, at which time
I started in the first form. In the sixth form my teacher was Mrs Kuperus, the headmistress. At the end of the year we were both in tears as we said a heartbreaking farewell.
In the summer of 1941 Grandma fell ill and had to have an operation, so my birthday passed with little celebration.
Grandma died in January 1942. No one knows how often I think of her and still love her. This birthday celebration in 1942 was intended to make up for the other, and Grandma’s candle was lit along with the rest.
The four of us are still doing well, and that brings me to the present date of 20 June 1942, and the solemn dedication of my diary.
Oral Comprehension Check
1. Why does Anne provide a brief sketch of her life?
2. What tells you that Anne loved her grandmother?
plunked down (an informal word)
put down in a casual
Reprint 2026-27
First Flight
Saturday, 20 June 1942
Dearest Kitty,
Our entire class is quaking in its boots. The reason, of course, is the forthcoming meeting in which the teachers decide who’ll move up to the next form and who’ll be kept back. Half the class is making bets. G.N. and I laugh ourselves silly at the two boys behind us, C.N. and Jacques, who have staked their entire holiday savings on their bet.
From morning to night, it’s “You’re going to pass”,
“No, I’m not”, “Yes, you are”, “No, I’m not”. Even G.’s pleading glances and my angry outbursts can’t calm them down. If you ask me, there are so many dummies that about a quarter of the class should be kept back, but teachers are the most unpredictable creatures on earth.
I’m not so worried about my girlfriends and myself. We’ll make it. The only subject I’m not sure about is maths. Anyway, all we can do is wait. Until then, we keep telling each other not to lose heart.
I get along pretty well with all my teachers. There are nine of them, seven men and two women. Mr
Keesing, the old fogey who teaches maths, was annoyed with me for ages because I talked so much.
After several warnings, he assigned me extra homework. An essay on the subject, ‘A Chatterbox’.
A chatterbox — what can you write about that? I’d worry about that later, I decided. I jotted down the title in my notebook, tucked it in my bag and tried to keep quiet.
That evening, after I’d finished the rest of my homework, the note about the essay caught my eye.
I began thinking about the subject while chewing the tip of my fountain pen. Anyone could ramble on and leave big spaces between the words, but the trick was to come up with convincing arguments to prove the necessity of talking. I thought and thought, and suddenly I had an idea. I wrote the three pages Mr Keesing had assigned me and was satisfied. I argued that talking is a student’s trait and that I would do my best to keep it under control, old fogey an old-fashioned ramble on talk or write aimlessly for long convincing argument a statement made in such a manner that people believe it quaking in its boots shaking with fear and nervousness
Reprint 2026-27
From the Diary of Anne Frank but that I would never be able to cure myself of the habit since my mother talked as much as I did if not more, and that there’s not much you can do about inherited traits.
Mr Keesing had a good laugh at my arguments, but when I proceeded to talk my way through the next lesson, he assigned me a second essay. This time it was supposed to be on ‘An Incorrigible
Chatterbox’. I handed it in, and Mr Keesing had nothing to complain about for two whole lessons.
However, during the third lesson he’d finally had enough. “Anne Frank, as punishment for talking in class, write an essay entitled — ‘Quack, Quack,
Quack, Said Mistress Chatterbox’.” incorrigible something that cannot be corrected (usually a bad quality)
inherited traits qualities (physical or mental) that one gets from one’s parents
The class roared. I had to laugh too, though I’d nearly exhausted my ingenuity on the topic of chatterboxes. It was time to come up with something else, something original. My friend,
Sanne, who’s good at poetry, offered to help me write the essay from beginning to end in verse and I jumped for joy. Mr Keesing was trying to play a joke on me with this ridiculous subject, but I’d make sure the joke was on him.
I finished my poem, and it was beautiful! It was about a mother duck and a father swan with three baby ducklings who were bitten to death by the father because they quacked too much. Luckily, Mr
Keesing took the joke the right way. He read the ingenuity originality and inventiveness
Reprint 2026-27
First Flight poem to the class, adding his own comments, and to several other classes as well. Since then I’ve been allowed to talk and haven’t been assigned any extra homework. On the contrary, Mr Keesing’s always making jokes these days.
[Extracted from The Diary of a Young Girl, with slight adaptation]
Oral Comprehension Check
1. Why was Mr Keesing annoyed with Anne? What did he ask her to do?
2. How did Anne justify her being a chatterbox in her essay?
3. Do you think Mr Keesing was a strict teacher?
4. What made Mr Keesing allow Anne to talk in class?
1. Was Anne right when she said that the world would not be interested in the musings of a thirteen-year-old girl?
2. There are some examples of diary or journal entries in the ‘Before You Read’ section. Compare these with what Anne writes in her diary. What language was the diary originally written in? In what way is Anne’s diary different?
3. Why does Anne need to give a brief sketch about her family? Does she treat
‘Kitty’ as an insider or an outsider?
4. How does Anne feel about her father, her grandmother, Mrs Kuperus and
Mr Keesing? What do these tell you about her?
5. What does Anne write in her first essay?
6. Anne says teachers are most unpredictable. Is Mr Keesing unpredictable?
7. What do these statements tell you about Anne Frank as a person?
(i) We don’t seem to be able to get any closer, and that’s the problem. Maybe it’s my fault that we don’t confide in each other.
(ii) I don’t want to jot down the facts in this diary the way most people would, but I want the diary to be my friend.
(iii) Margot went to Holland in December, and I followed in February, when
I was plunked down on the table as a birthday present for Margot.
(iv) If you ask me, there are so many dummies that about a quarter of the class should be kept back, but teachers are the most unpredictable creatures on earth.
Reprint 2026-27
From the Diary of Anne Frank (v) Anyone could ramble on and leave big spaces between the words, but the trick was to come up with convincing arguments to prove the necessity of talking.
I. Look at the following words.
headmistress long-awaited homework notebook stiff-backed outbursts
These words are compound words. They are made up of two or more words.
Compound words can be:
• nouns: headmistress, homework, notebook, outbursts
• adjectives: long-awaited, stiff-backed
• verbs: sleep-walk, baby-sit
Match the compound words under ‘A’ with their meanings under ‘B’.
Use each in a sentence.
1. Heartbreaking – obeying and respecting the law
2. Homesick – think about pleasant things, forgetting about the
3. Blockhead – something produced by a person, machine or organisation
4. Law-abiding – producing great sadness
5. Overdo – an occasion when vehicles/machines stop working
6. Daydream – an informal word which means a very stupid person
7. Breakdown – missing home and family very much
8. Output – do something to an excessive degree
II. Phrasal Verbs
A phrasal verb is a verb followed by a preposition or an adverb. Its meaning is often different from the meanings of its parts. Compare the meanings of the verbs get on and run away in (a) and (b) below. You can easily guess their meanings in (a) but in (b) they have special meanings.
(a) • She got on at Agra when the bus stopped for breakfast.
• Dev Anand ran away from home when he was a teenager.
(b) • She’s eager to get on in life. (succeed)
• The visitors ran away with the match. (won easily)
Reprint 2026-27
First Flight
Some phrasal verbs have three parts: a verb followed by an adverb and a preposition.
(c) Our car ran out of petrol just outside the city limits.
(d) The government wants to reach out to the people with this new campaign.
1. The text you’ve just read has a number of phrasal verbs commonly used in English. Look up the following in a dictionary for their meanings (under the entry for the italicised word).
(i) plunge (right) in (iii) ramble on (ii) kept back (iv) get along with
2. Now find the sentences in the lesson that have the phrasal verbs given below. Match them with their meanings. (You have already found out the meanings of some of them.) Are their meanings the same as that of their parts? (Note that two parts of a phrasal verb may occur separated in the text.)
(i) plunge in – speak or write without focus (ii) kept back – stay indoors (iii) move up – make (them) remain quiet (iv) ramble on – have a good relationship with (v) get along with – give an assignment (homework) to a person in authority (the teacher)
(vi) calm down – compensate (vii) stay in – go straight to the topic (viii) make up for – go to the next grade (ix) hand in – not promoted
III. Idioms
Idioms are groups of words with a fixed order, and a particular meaning, different from the meanings of each of their words put together. (Phrasal verbs can also be idioms; they are said to be ‘idiomatic’ when their meaning is unpredictable.) For example, do you know what it means to ‘meet one’s match’ in English? It means to meet someone who is as good as oneself, or even better, in some skill or quality. Do you know what it means to ‘let the cat out of the bag’? Can you guess?
1. Here are a few sentences from the text which have idiomatic expressions. Can you say what each means? (You might want to consult a dictionary first.)
(i) Our entire class is quaking in its boots.
(ii) Until then, we keep telling each other not to lose heart.
Reprint 2026-27
From the Diary of Anne Frank
• Part of Body 1 [C] either of the two organs on the face that you see with: The suspect has dark hair and green eyes.
• Ability to See 3 [sing.] the ability to see: A surgeon needs a good eye and a steady hand.
• Way of Seeing 4 [C, usually sing.] a particular way of seeing sth: He looked at the design with the eye of an engineer.
• Of Needle 5 [C] the hole in the end of a needle that you put the thread through.
IDM be all eyes to be watching sb/sth carefully and with a lot of interest before/in front of sb’s (very) eyes in sb’s presence; in front of sb: He had seen his life’s work destroyed before his very eyes. Be up to your eyes in sth to have a lot of sth to deal with: We’re up to our eyes in work.
(iii) Mr Keesing was annoyed with me for ages because I talked so much.
(iv) Mr Keesing was trying to play a joke on me with this ridiculous subject, but I’d make sure the joke was on him.
2. Here are a few more idiomatic expressions that occur in the text.
Try to use them in sentences of your own.
(i) caught my eye (iii) laugh ourselves silly (ii) he’d had enough (iv) can’t bring myself to
IV. Do you know how to use a dictionary to find out the meanings of idiomatic expressions? Take, for example, the expression caught my eye in the story.
Where — under which word — would you look for it in the dictionary?
Look for it under the first word. But if the first word is a ‘grammatical’ word like a, the, for, etc., then take the ne
