BEFORE YOU READ
Activity
1. The word ‘proposal’ has several meanings. Can you guess what sort of proposal the play is about?
(i) a suggestion, plan or scheme for doing something (ii) an offer for a possible plan or action (iii) the act of asking someone’s hand in marriage
A Russian Wedding
Do you know anything about a Russian marriage ceremony?
Read this article about a Russian wedding.
Preparations for a Russian Wedding: A Russian wedding is very simple. The planning only includes arranging for rings, brides’ dress, cars, and a reception. Earlier, the bride’s family paid for the reception, but now-a-days brides’ and grooms’ families usually share expenses. A Russian wedding lasts for two days; some weddings last as long as a week, and the occasion becomes something to remember for years.
The necessary part of the wedding ceremony is a wedding procession of several cars. The best friends of the groom/ bride meet before the wedding a few times, make posters, write speeches and organise contests. When the groom arrives to fetch the bride for the registration, he has to fight to get her! Russians usually live in apartments in tall buildings, and the groom has to climb several stairs to reach his bride. But at each landing he must answer a question to be allowed to go up. The bride’s friends ask difficult questions (sometimes about the bride, sometimes just difficult riddles), and the groom must answer with the help of his friends. For example, he may be shown a few photos of baby girls and he must say which one his bride is. If he guesses wrong, he must pay cash to move ahead. After the
Reprint 2026-27
Wedding Ceremonies in Russia and India
Customs similar to Customs different from
Indian ones Indian ones marriage registration, the newly-married couple leaves the guests for a tour of the city sights. After two or three hours of the city tour the couple arrives at the reception. The couple sits at a specially arranged table with their family, friends and invited guests. The reception starts with toasts to the couple. A wedding toast is a custom where a close friend or relative of the groom or the bride says a few words to wish the couple, then everyone raises their glass of wine, and drink it up at the same moment. The groom is then asked to kiss the bride. After a few toasts, people start eating and drinking, and generally have fun. After some time, the bride gets ‘stolen’! She disappears, and when the groom starts looking for her, he is asked to pay a fee. Usually it is his friends who ‘steal’ the bride. Then there are the bride’s friends — they steal the bride’s shoe. The groom must pay money for the shoe too. The guests enjoy watching these tussles, and continue partying.
2. Do you think Indian and Russian weddings have any customs in common? With the help of a partner, fill in the table below.
‘‘The Proposal’’ (originally titled ‘‘A Marriage Proposal’’) is a one- act play, a farce, by the Russian short story writer and dramatist
Anton Chekhov. It was written in 1888–89.
The play is about the tendency of wealthy families to seek ties with other wealthy families, to increase their estates by encouraging marriages that make good economic sense. Ivan Lomov, a long time wealthy neighbour of Stepan Chubukov, also wealthy, comes to seek the hand of Chubukov’s twenty-five-year-old daughter, Natalya.
All three are quarrelsome people, and they quarrel over petty issues.
The proposal is in danger of being forgotten amidst all this quarrelling. But economic good sense ensures that the proposal is made, after all — although the quarrelling perhaps continues!
The Proposal
Reprint 2026-27
First Flight
Characters
STEPAN STEPANOVITCH CHUBUKOV : a landowner
NATALYA STEPANOVNA : his daughter, twenty-five years old
IVAN VASSILEVITCH LOMOV : a neighbour of Chubukov, a large and hearty, but very suspicious, landowner
A drawing-room in Chubukov‘s house.
Lomov enters, wearing a dress-jacket and white gloves. Chubukov rises to meet him.
CHUBUKOV : My dear fellow, whom do I see! Ivan Vassilevitch! I am extremely glad! [Squeezes his hand] Now this is a surprise, my darling... How are you?
LOMOV : Thank you. And how may you be getting on?
CHUBUKOV : We just get along somehow, my angel, thanks to your prayers, and so on. Sit down, please do... Now, you know, you shouldn’t forget all about your neighbours, my darling.
My dear fellow, why are you so formal in your get-up!
Evening dress, gloves, and so on. Can you be going anywhere, my treasure?
LOMOV : No. I’ve come only to see you, honoured Stepan
Stepanovitch.
CHUBUKOV : Then why are you in evening dress, my precious? As if you’re paying a New Year’s Eve visit!
LOMOV : Well, you see, it’s like this. [Takes his arm] I’ve come to you, honoured Stepan Stepanovitch, to trouble you with a request.
Not once or twice have I already had the privilege of applying to you for help, and you have always, so to speak... I must ask your pardon, I am getting excited. I shall drink some water, honoured Stepan Stepanovitch.
[Drinks.]
CHUBUKOV : [aside] He’s come to borrow money. Shan’t give him any!
[aloud] What is it, my beauty?
LOMOV : You see, Honoured Stepanitch... I beg pardon Stepan
Honouritch... I mean, I’m awfully excited, as you will please notice... In short, you alone can help me, though I don’t deserve it, of course... and haven’t any right to count on your assistance...
CHUBUKOV : Oh, don’t go round and round it, darling! Spit it out! Well?
LOMOV : One moment... this very minute. The fact is I’ve come to ask the hand of your daughter, Natalya Stepanovna, in marriage.
Reprint 2026-27
The Proposal
CHUBUKOV : [joyfully] By Jove! Ivan Vassilevitch! Say it again — I didn’t hear it all!
LOMOV : I have the honour to ask...
CHUBUKOV : [interrupting] My dear fellow... I’m so glad, and so on...
Yes, indeed, and all that sort of thing. [Embraces and kisses
Lomov] I’ve been hoping for it for a long time. It’s been my continual desire. [Sheds a tear] And I’ve always loved you, my angel, as if you were my own son. May God give you both — His help and His love and so on, and so much hope... What am I behaving in this idiotic way for? I’m off my balance with joy, absolutely off my balance! Oh, with all my soul... I’ll go and call Natasha, and all that.
LOMOV : [greatly moved] Honoured Stepan Stepanovitch, do you think I may count on her consent?
CHUBUKOV : Why, of course, my darling, and... as if she won’t consent!
She’s in love; egad, she’s like a lovesick cat, and so on.
Shan’t be long!
LOMOV : It’s cold... I’m trembling all over, just as if I’d got an examination before me. The great thing is, I must have my mind made up. If I give myself time to think, to hesitate, to talk a lot, to look for an ideal, or for real love, then I’ll never get married. Brr... It’s cold! Natalya
Reprint 2026-27
First Flight
Stepanovna is an excellent housekeeper, not bad-looking, well-educated. What more do I want? But I’m getting a noise in my ears from excitement. [Drinks] And it’s impossible for me not to marry. In the first place, I’m already 35 — a critical age, so to speak. In the second place, I ought to lead a quiet and regular life. I suffer from palpitations, I’m excitable and always getting awfully upset; at this very moment my lips are trembling, and there’s a twitch in my right eyebrow. But the very worst of all is the way I sleep. I no sooner get into bed and begin to go off, when suddenly something in my left side gives a pull, and I can feel it in my shoulder and head... I jump up like a lunatic, walk about a bit and lie down again, but as soon as I begin to get off to sleep there’s another pull! And this may happen twenty times...
[Natalya Stepanovna comes in.]
NATLYA : Well, there! It’s you, and papa said, “Go; there’s a merchant come for his goods.” How do you do, Ivan
Vassilevitch?
LOMOV : How do you do, honoured Natalya Stepanovna?
NATALYA : You must excuse my apron and neglige. We’re shelling peas for drying. Why haven’t you been here for such a long time? Sit down... [They seat themselves.] Won’t you have some lunch?
LOMOV : No, thank you, I’ve had some already.
NATALYA : Then smoke. Here are the matches. The weather is splendid now, but yesterday it was so wet that the workmen didn’t do anything all day. How much hay have you stacked? Just think, I felt greedy and had a whole field cut, and now I’m not at all pleased about it because I’m afraid my hay may rot. I ought to have waited a bit. But what’s this? Why, you’re in evening dress! Well, I never!
Are you going to a ball or what? Though I must say you look better... Tell me, why are you got up like that?
LOMOV : [excited] You see, honoured Natalya Stepanovna... the fact is, I’ve made up my mind to ask you to hear me out...
Of course you’ll be surprised and perhaps even angry, but a... [aside] It’s awfully cold!
NATALYA : What’s the matter? [pause] Well?
LOMOV : I shall try to be brief. You must know, honoured Natalya
Stepanovna, that I have long, since my childhood, in fact,
Reprint 2026-27
The Proposal had the privilege of knowing your family. My late aunt and her husband, from whom, as you know, I inherited my land, always had the greatest respect for your father and your late mother. The Lomovs and the Chubukovs have always had the most friendly, and I might almost say the most affectionate, regard for each other. And, as you know, my land is a near neighbour of yours. You will remember that my Oxen Meadows touch your birchwoods.
NATALYA : Excuse my interrupting you. You say, “my Oxen Meadows”.
But are they yours?
LOMOV : Yes, mine.
NATALYA : What are you talking about? Oxen Meadows are ours, not yours!
LOMOV : No, mine, honoured Natalya Stepanovna.
NATALYA : Well, I never knew that before. How do you make that
LOMOV : How? I’m speaking of those Oxen Meadows which are wedged in between your birchwoods and the Burnt
NATALYA : Yes, yes... they’re ours.
LOMOV : No, you’re mistaken, honoured Natalya Stepanovna, they’re mine.
NATALYA : Just think, Ivan Vassilevitch! How long have they been
LOMOV : How long? As long as I can remember.
NATALYA : Really, you won’t get me to believe that!
LOMOV : But you can see from the documents, honoured Natalya
Stepanovna. Oxen Meadows, it’s true, were once the subject of dispute, but now everybody knows that they are mine. There’s nothing to argue about. You see my aunt’s grandmother gave the free use of these Meadows in perpetuity to the peasants of your father’s grandfather, in return for which they were to make bricks for her. The peasants belonging to your father’s grandfather had the free use of the Meadows for forty years, and had got into the habit of regarding them as their own, when it happened that...
NATALYA : No, it isn’t at all like that! Both grandfather and great- grandfather reckoned that their land extended to Burnt
Marsh — which means that Oxen Meadows were ours. I don’t see what there is to argue about. It’s simply silly!
Reprint 2026-27
First Flight
LOMOV : I’ll show you the documents, Natalya Stepanovna!
NATALYA : No, you’re simply joking, or making fun of me. What a surprise! We’ve had the land for nearly three hundred years, and then we’re suddenly told that it isn’t ours!
Ivan Vassilevitch, I can hardly believe my own ears. These
Meadows aren’t worth much to me. They only come to five dessiatins, and are worth perhaps 300 roubles, but I can’t stand unfairness. Say what you will, I can’t stand unfairness.
LOMOV : Hear me out, I implore you! The peasants of your father’s grandfather, as I have already had the honour of explaining to you, used to bake bricks for my aunt’s grandmother. Now my aunt’s grandmother, wishing to make them a pleasant...
NATALYA : I can’t make head or tail of all this about aunts and grandfathers and grandmothers. The Meadows are ours, that’s all.
LOMOV : Mine.
NATALYA : Ours! You can go on proving it for two days on end, you can go and put on fifteen dress jackets, but I tell you they’re ours, ours, ours! I don’t want anything of yours and I don’t want to give anything of mine. So there!
LOMOV : Natalya Stepanovna, I don’t want the Meadows, but I am acting on principle. If you like, I’ll make you a present of them.
NATALYA : I can make you a present of them myself, because they’re mine! Your behaviour, Ivan Vassilevitch, is strange, to say the least! Up to this we have always thought of you as a good neighbour, a friend; last year we lent you our threshing-machine, although on that account we had to put off our own threshing till November, but you behave to us as if we were gypsies. Giving me my own land, indeed! No, really, that’s not at all neighbourly! In my opinion, it’s even impudent, if you want to know.
LOMOV : Then you make out that I’m a landgrabber? Madam, never in my life have I grabbed anybody else’s land and I shan’t allow anybody to accuse me of having done so. [Quickly steps to the carafe and drinks more water] Oxen Meadows are mine!
NATALYA : It’s not true, they’re ours!
LOMOV : Mine!
Reprint 2026-27
The Proposal
NATALYA : It’s not true! I’ll prove it! I’ll send my mowers out to the
Meadows this very day!
LOMOV : What?
NATALYA : My mowers will be there this very day!
LOMOV : I’ll give it to them in the neck!
NATALYA : You dare!
LOMOV : [Clutches at his heart] Oxen Meadows are mine! You understand? Mine!
NATALYA : Please don’t shout! You can shout yourself hoarse in your own house but here I must ask you to restrain yourself!
LOMOV : If it wasn’t, madam, for this awful, excruciating palpitation, if my whole inside wasn’t upset, I’d talk to you in a different way! [Yells] Oxen Meadows are mine!
NATALYA : Ours!
LOMOV : Mine!
NATALYA : Ours!
LOMOV : Mine!
[Enter Chubukov]
CHUBUKOV : What’s the matter? What are you shouting for?
NATALYA : Papa, please tell this gentleman who owns Oxen
Meadows, we or he?
CHUBUKOV : [to Lomov] Darling, the Meadows are ours!
Reprint 2026-27
First Flight
LOMOV : But, please, Stepan Stepanovitch, how can they be yours?
Do be a reasonable man! My aunt’s grandmother gave the Meadows for the temporary and free use of your grandfather’s peasants. The peasants used the land for forty years and got accustomed to it as if it was their own, when it happened that...
CHUBUKOV : Excuse me, my precious. You forget just this, that the peasants didn’t pay your grandmother and all that, because the Meadows were in dispute, and so on. And now everybody knows that they’re ours. It means that you haven’t seen the plan.
LOMOV : I’ll prove to you that they’re mine!
CHUBUKOV : You won’t prove it, my darling —
LOMOV : I shall
CHUBUKOV : Dear one, why yell like that? You won’t prove anything just by yelling. I don’t want anything of yours, and don’t intend to give up what I have. Why should I? And you know, my beloved, that if you propose to go on arguing about it, I’d much sooner give up the Meadows to the peasants than to you. There!
LOMOV : I don’t understand! How have you the right to give away somebody else’s property?
CHUBUKOV : You may take it that I know whether I have the right or not. Because, young man, I’m not used to being spoken to in that tone of voice, and so on. I, young man, am twice your age, and ask you to speak to me without agitating yourself, and all that.
LOMOV : No, you just think I’m a fool and want to have me on! You call my land yours, and then you want me to talk to you calmly and politely! Good neighbours don’t behave like that, Stepan Stepanovitch! You’re not a neighbour, you’re a grabber!
CHUBUKOV : What’s that? What did you say?
NATALYA : Papa, send the mowers out to the Meadows at once!
CHUBUKOV : What did you say, sir?
NATALYA : Oxen Meadows are ours, and I shan’t give them up, shan’t give them up, shan’t give them up!
LOMOV : We’ll see! I’ll have the matter taken to court, and then I’ll show you!
CHUBUKOV : To court? You can take it to court, and all that! You can!
I know you; you’re just on the look-out for a chance to go
Reprint 2026-27
The Proposal to court, and all that. You pettifogger! All your people were like that! All of them!
LOMOV : Never mind about my people! The Lomovs have all been honourable people, and not one has ever been tried for embezzlement, like your grandfather!
CHUBUKOV : You Lomovs have had lunacy in your family, all of you!
NATALYA : All, all, all!
CHUBUKOV : Your grandfather was a drunkard, and your younger aunt,
Nastasya Mihailovna, ran away with an architect, and so on...
LOMOV : And your mother was hump-backed. [Clutches at his heart]
Something pulling in my side... My head.... Help! Water!
CHUBUKOV : Your father was a guzzling gambler!
NATALYA : And there haven’t been many backbiters to equal your
CHUBUKOV : My left foot has gone to sleep... You’re an intriguer....Oh, my heart! And it’s an open secret that before the last elections you bri... I can see stars... Where’s my hat?
NATALYA : It’s low! It’s dishonest! It’s mean!
CHUBUKOV : And you’re just a malicious, doublefaced intriguer! Yes!
LOMOV : Here’s my hat. My heart! Which way? Where’s the door?
Oh I think I’m dying! My foot’s quite numb...
[Goes to the door.]
CHUBUKOV : [following him] And don’t set foot in my house again!
NATALYA : Take it to court! We’ll see!
[Lomov staggers out.]
CHUBUKOV : Devil take him!
[Walks about in excitement.]
NATALYA : What a rascal! What trust can one have in one’s neighbours after that!
CHUBUKOV : The villain! The scarecrow!
NATALYA : The monster! First he takes our land and then he has the impudence to abuse us.
CHUBUKOV : And that blind hen, yes, that turnip-ghost has the confounded cheek to make a proposal, and so on! What?
A proposal!
NATALYA : What proposal?
CHUBUKOV : Why, he came here to propose to you.
NATALYA : To propose? To me? Why didn’t you tell me so before?
CHUBUKOV : So he dresses up in evening clothes. The stuffed sausage!
The wizen-faced frump!
Reprint 2026-27
First Flight
NATALYA : To propose to me? Ah! [Falls into an easy-chair and wails]
Bring him back! Back! Ah! Bring him here.
CHUBUKOV : Bring whom here?
NATALYA : Quick,
