Transport and Communication 55 pipelines. These are used for inter-regional and intra-regional transport, and each one (except pipelines) carries both passengers and freight.
The significance of a mode depends on the type of goods and services to be transported, costs of transport and the mode available.
International movement of goods is handled by ocean freighters. Road transport is cheaper and faster over short distances and for door-to- door services. Railways are most suited for large volumes of bulky materials over long distances within a country. High-value, light and perishable goods are best moved by airways.
In a well-managed transport system, these various modes complement each other.
Land Transport
Most of the movement of goods and services takes place over land. In early days, humans themselves were carriers. Have you ever seen a bride being carried on a palanquin (palki/doli)
by four persons (Kahars in north India). Later animals were used as beasts of burden. Have you seen mules, horses and camels, carrying loads of cargo in rural areas? With the invention of the wheel, the use of carts and wagons became important. The revolution in transport came about only after the invention of the steam engine in the eighteenth century. Perhaps the first public railway line was opened in 1825 between Stockton and Darlington in northern
England and then onwards, railways became the most popular and fastest form of transport in the nineteenth century. It opened up continental interiors for commercial grain farming, mining and manufacturing in U.S.A.
The invention of the internal combustion engine revolutionised road transport in terms of road quality and vehicles (motor cars and trucks)
plying over them. Among the newer developments in land transportation are pipelines, ropeways and cableways. Liquids like mineral oil, water, sludge and sewers are transported by pipelines. The great freight carriers are the railways, ocean vessels, barges, boats and motor trucks and pipelines.
In general, the old and elementary forms like the human porter, pack animal, cart or wagon are the most expensive means of transportation and large freighters are the cheapest. They are important in supplementing modern channels and carriers which penetrate the interiors in large countries. In the densely populated districts of India and China, overland transport still takes place by human porters or carts drawn or pushed by humans.
Pack Animals
Horses are used as a draught animal even in the Western countries. Dogs and reindeer are used in North America, North
Europe and Siberia to draw sledges over snow-covered ground. Mules are preferred in the mountainous regions; while camels are used for caravan movement in deserts.
In India, bullocks are used for pulling carts.
Fig. 7.2: A horse cart in a village Tefki, in Ethiopia
Fig. 7.1: Ropeway and Cable cars in Austria
This means of transport is usually found on steep mountain slopes and mines which are not suitable for building roads.
Reprint 2026-27
Fundamentals of Human Geography 56
Road transport is the most economical for short distances compared to railways. Freight transport by road is gaining importance because it offers door-to-door service. But unmetalled roads, though simple in construction, are not effective and serviceable for all seasons. During the rainy season these become unmotorable and even the metalled ones are seriously handicapped during heavy rains and floods. In such conditions, the high embankment of rail-tracks and the efficient maintenance of railway transport service, is an effective solution. But the rail kilometrage being small cannot serve the needs of vast and developing countries at a low cost. Roads, therefore, play a vital role in a nation’s trade and commerce and for promoting tourism.
The quality of the roads varies greatly between developed and developing countries because road construction and maintenance require heavy expenditure. In developed countries good quality roads are universal and provide long-distance links in the form of motorways, autobahns (Germany), and inter– state highways for speedy movement. Lorries, of increasing size and power to carry heavy loads, are common. But unfortunately, the world’s road system is not well developed.
The world’s total motorable road length is only about 15 million km, of which North
America accounts for 33 per cent. The highest road density and the highest number of vehicles are registered in this continent compared to Western Europe.
Traffic Flows: Traffic on roads has increased dramatically in recent years. When the road network cannot cope with the demands of traffic, congestion occurs. City roads suffer from chronic traffic congestion. Peaks (high points) and troughs (low points) of traffic flow can be seen on roads at particular times of the day, for example, peaks occurring during the rush hour before and after work. Most of the cities in the world have been facing the problem of congestion.
Think on these lines for a better tomorrow . . .
URBAN TRANSPORT SOLUTIONS
Higher Parking Fee
Mass Rapid Transit (MRT)
Improved Public Bus Service
Expressways
Highways
Highways are metalled roads connecting distant places. They are constructed in a manner for unobstructed vehicular movement. As such these are 80 m wide, with separate traffic lanes, bridges, flyovers and dual carriageways to facilitate uninterrupted traffic flow. In developed countries, every city and port town is linked through highways.
Fig. 7.3 : Dharmavaram Tuni National Highway,
In North America, highway density is high, about 0.65 km per sq km. Every place is within
20 km distance from a highway. Cities located on the Pacific coast (west) are well-connected with those of the Atlantic Coast (east). Likewise, the cities of Canada in the north are linked with those of Mexico in the south. The Trans-
Reprint 2026-27
Transport and Communication Transport and Communication Transport and Communication Transport and Communication Transport and Communication 57 57 57 57 57
Canadian Highway links Vancouver in British
Columbia(west coast) to St. John’s City in
Newfoundland (east coast) and the Alaskan
Highway links Edmonton (Canada) to
Anchorage (Alaska).
The Pan-American Highway, a large portion of which has been constructed, will connect the countries of South America, Central
America and U.S.A.-Canada. The Trans-
Continental Stuart Highway connects Darwin (north coast) and Melbourne via Tennant Creek and Alice Springs in Australia.
Europe has a large number of vehicles and a well-developed highway network. But highways face a lot of competition from railways and waterways.
In Russia, a dense highway network is developed in the industrialised region west of the Urals with Moscow as the hub. The important Moscow-Vladivostok Highway serves the region to the east. Due to the vast geographical area, highways in Russia are not as important as railways.
In China, highways criss-cross the country connecting all major cities such as Tsungtso (near Vietnam boundary), Shanghai (central
China), Guangzhou (south) and Beijing (north).
A new highway links Chengdu with Lhasa in
In India, there are many highways linking the major towns and cities. The
Golden Quadrilateral (GQ) or Super
Expressway connect the four metropolitan cities — New Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and
Kolkata.
In Africa, a highway joins Algiers in the north to Conakry in Guinea. Similarly, Cairo is also connected to Cape Town.
Border Roads Border Roads Border Roads Border Roads Border Roads
Roads laid along international boundaries are called border roads. They play an important role in integrating people in remote areas with major cities and providing defence. Almost all countries have such roads to transport goods to border villages and military camps.
Railways Railways Railways Railways Railways
Railways are a mode of land transport for bulky goods and passengers over long distances. The railway gauges vary in different countries and are roughly classified as broad (more than 1.5 m), standard (1.44 m), metre gauge (1 m) and smaller gauges. The standard gauge is used in the U.K.
Commuter trains are very popular in U.K.,
U.S.A, Japan and India. These carry millions of passengers daily to and fro in the city. There are about 13 lakh km of railways open for traffic in the world.
Europe has one of the most dense rail networks in the world. There are about
4,40,000 km of railways, most of which is double or multiple-tracked. Belgium has the highest density of 1 km of railway for every 6.5 sq kms area. The industrial regions exhibit some of the highest densities in the world. The important rail heads are London, Paris,
Brussels, Milan, Berlin and Warsaw. Passenger transport is more important than freight in many of these countries. Underground railways are important in London and Paris. Channel
Tunnel, operated by Euro Tunnel Group through England, connects London with Paris.
Trans-continental railway lines have now lost
Fig. 7.4: Tube Train in Vienna Fig. 7.4: Tube Train in Vienna Fig. 7.4: Tube Train in Vienna Fig. 7.4: Tube Train in Vienna Fig. 7.4: Tube Train in Vienna
Reprint 2 0 2 6 - 2 7
Fundamentals of Human Geography 58 their importance to quicker and more flexible transport systems of airways and roadways.
In Russia, railways account for about 90 per cent of the country’s total transport with a very dense network west of the Urals. Moscow is the most important rail head with major lines radiating to different parts of the country’s vast geographical area. Underground railways and commuter trains are also important in Moscow.
North America has one of the most extensive rail networks accounting for nearly
40 per cent of the world’s total? In contrast to many European countries, the railways are used more for long-distance bulky freight like ores, grains, timber and machinery than for passengers. The most dense rail network is found in the highly industrialised and urbanised region of East Central U.S.A. and adjoining Canada.
In Canada, railways are in the public sector and distributed all over the sparsely populated areas. The transcontinental railways carry the bulk of wheat and coal tonnage.
Australia has about 40,000 km of railways, of which 25 per cent are found in New
South Wales alone. The west-east Australian
National Railway line runs across the country from Perth to Sydney. New Zealand’s railways are mainly in the North Island to serve the farming areas.
In South America, the rail network is the most dense in two regions, namely, the Pampas of Argentina and the coffee growing region of
Brazil which together account for 40 per cent of South America’s total route length. Only Chile, among the remaining countries has a considerable route length linking coastal centres with the mining sites in the interior. Peru, Bolivia,
Ecuador, Colombia and Venezuela have short single-track rail-lines from ports to the interior with no inter-connecting links.
There is only one trans-continental rail route linking Buenos Aires (Argentina) with
Valparaiso (Chile) across the Andes Mountains through the Uspallatta Pass located at a height of 3,900 m.
In Asia, rail network is the most dense in the thickly populated areas of Japan, China and
India. Other countries have relatively few rail routes. West Asia is the least developed in rail facilities because of vast deserts and sparsely populated regions.
Africa continent, despite being the second largest, has only 40,000 km of railways with South Africa alone accounting for 18,000 km due to the concentration of gold, diamond and copper mining activities.
The important routes of the continent are: (i)
the Benguela Railway through Angola to
Katanga-Zambia Copper Belt; (ii) the Tanzania
Railway from the Zambian Copper Belt to
Dar-es-Salaam on the coast; (iii) the Railway through Botswana and Zimbabwe linking the landlocked states to the South African network; and (iv) the Blue Train from Cape
Town to Pretoria in the Republic of South
Africa. Elsewhere, as in Algeria, Senegal,
Nigeria, Kenya and Ethiopia, railway lines connect port cities to interior centres but do not form a good network with other countries.
Trans–Continental Railways
Trans–continental railways run across the continent and link its two ends. They were constructed for economic and political reasons to facilitate long runs in different directions.
The following are the most important of these:
Trans–Siberian Railway
This is a trans–siberian Railways major rail route of Russia runs from St. Petersburg in the west to Vladivostok on the Pacific Coast in the east passing through Moscow, Ufa, Novosibirsk,
Irkutsk, Chita and Khabarovsk. It is the most important route in Asia and the longest (9,332 km)
Reprint 2026-27
Transport and Communication
Transport and Communication 59 59 59 59 59 double-tracked and electrified trans– continental railway in the world. It has helped in opening up its Asian region to West European markets. It runs across the Ural Mountains Ob and Yenisei rivers Chita is an important agro- centre and Irkutsk, a fur centre. There are connecting links to the south, namely, to Odessa (Ukraine), Baku on the Caspian Coast,
Tashkent (Uzbekistan), Ulan Bator (Mongolia), and Shenyang (Mukden) and Beijing in China.
Trans–Canadian Railways Trans–Canadian Railways Trans–Canadian Railways Trans–Canadian Railways Trans–Canadian Railways
This 7,050 km long rail-line in Canada runs from
Halifax in the east to Vancouver on the Pacific
Coast passing through Montreal, Ottawa,
Winnipeg and Calgary (Fig. 7.6). It was constructed in 1886, initially as part of an agreement to make British Columbia on the west coast join the Federation of States. Later on, it
Fig. 7.5: Trans–Siberian Railway gained economic significance because it connected the Quebec-Montreal Industrial
Region with the wheat belt of the Prairie Region and the Coniferous Forest region in the north.
Thus each of these regions became complementary to the other. A loop line from
Winnipeg to Thunder Bay (Lake Superior)
connects this rail-line with one of the important waterways of the world. This line is the economic artery of Canada. Wheat and meat are the important exports on this route.
The Union and Pacific Railway The Union and Pacific Railway The Union and Pacific Railway The Union and Pacific Railway The Union and Pacific Railway
This rail-line connects New York on the Atlantic
Coast to San Francisco on the Pacific Coast passing through Cleveland, Chicago, Omaha,
Evans, Ogden and Sacramento. The most valuable exports on this route are ores, grain, paper, chemicals and machinery.
Reprint 2026-27
Fundamentals of Human Geography 60
The Australian Trans–Continental
This rail-line runs west-east across the southern part of the continent from Perth on the west coast, to Sydney on the east coast. passing through Kalgoorlie, Broken Hill and Port
Augusta (Fig. 7.7).
Another major north-south line connects
Adelaide and Alice Spring and to be joined further to the Darwin–Birdum line.
The Orient Express
This line runs from Paris to Istanbul passing through Strasbourg, Munich, Vienna,
Budapest and Belgrade. The journey time from
London to Istanbul by this Express is now reduced to 96 hours as against 10 days by the sea-route. The chief exports on this rail-route are cheese, bacon, oats, wine, fruits, and machinery.
There is a proposal to build a Trans–Asiatic
Railway linking Istanbul with Bangkok via
Iran, Pakistan, India, Bangladesh and
Myanmar.
WATER TRANSPORT
One of the great advantages of water transportation is that it does not require route construction. The oceans are linked with each other and are negotiable with ships of various sizes. All that is needed is to provide port facilities at the two ends. It is much cheaper because the friction of water is far less than that of land. The energy cost of water transportation is lower. Water transport is divided into sea routes and inland waterways.
Fig. 7.6: Trans–Canadian Railway
Reprint 2026-27
Transport and Communication
Transport and Communication 61 61 61 61 61
Fig. 7.8: The view of Seine River from the
Eiffel Tower (One can see how the river has become an important Inland waterway)
become an important Inland waterway)
Sea Routes Sea Routes Sea Routes Sea Routes Sea Routes
The oceans offer a smooth highway traversable in all directions with no maintenance costs. Its transformation into a routeway by sea-going vessels is an important development in human adaptation to the physical environment.
Compared to land and air, ocean transport is a cheaper means of haulage (carrying of load) of bulky material over long distances from one continent to another.
Modern passenger liners (ships) and cargo ships are equipped with radar, wireless and other navigation aids. The development of refrigerated chambers for perishable goods, tankers and specialised ships has also improved cargo transport. The use of containers has made cargo handling at the world’s major ports easier.
Important Sea Routes Important Sea Routes Important Sea Routes Important Sea Routes Important Sea Routes
Major sea routes are shown in the Fig. 7.9. Some important routes have been discussed in the following pages.
The Northern Atlantic Sea Route
This links North-eastern U.S.A. and North- western Europe, the two industrially developed
Fig. 7.7: Australian Trans–Continental Railway
Reprint 2026-27
Fundamentals of Human Geography 62 regions of the world. The foreign trade over this route is greater than that of the rest of the world combined. One fourth of the world’s foreign trade moves on this route. It is, therefore, the busiest in the world and otherwise, called the
Big Trunk Route. Both the coasts have highly advanced ports and harbour facilities.
Find out some of the important ports on the coast of
U.S.A. and Western Europe in your atlas.
The Mediterranean–Indian Ocean Sea
This sea route passes through the heart of the Old World and serves more countries and people than any other
