Glossary 81 and precious stones. A mine usually denotes underground working except in open-pit mines.
A substance that is found in the earth’s crust, and which generally has a definite chemical composition unlike most rocks.
Mineral Fuel
Non-metallic minerals such as coal and petroleum which are used as fuel.
Mineral Oil
A mixture of hydrocarbons in solid, gaseous or liquid form found in the earth. It is commonly known as petroleum. It became a commercial product only in 1859.
Mineral Ore
Metals in their raw state as extracted from the earth.
An economic activity concerned with the extraction of commercially valuable minerals from the bowels of the earth.
Mixed Farming
A type of farming in which cultivation of crops and raising of livestock go hand in hand.
Both these activities play an important part in the economy.
Natural Resources
Wealth supplied by nature-mineral deposits, soil fertility, timber, fuel, water, potential water-power, fish and wild life, etc.
Nomadism
A way of life of the people who are required to shift their dwellings frequently from place to place in search of pastures for their animals— the mainstay of their economy.
Open-cast Mine
A place where soil and its outward cover are first removed and a mineral or ore is extracted by quarrying. In a way, it is a quarry on a large scale. This method of mining is known as open-cast mining.
Pastoralism
An economy that solely depends upon animals. Whereas nomadic pastoralism is practised mainly for subsistence, the modern ranches present an example of commercial pastoralism.
Plantation Agriculture
A large-scale one-crop farming resembling factory production. It is usually characterised by large estate, huge capital investment, and modern and scientific techniques of cultivation and trade.
The commercial part of a harbour containing facilities for embarking and disembarking passengers, loading and unloading, and some facilities for the storage of cargo.
Primary Activity
Activities concerned with collecting or making available materials, provided by nature, for example, agriculture, fishing, forestry, hunting or mining.
An open-air excavation from which stone is obtained by cutting, blasting, etc.
Large stock farms, usually fenced in, where animals are bred and reared on a commercial scale. They are found especially in the United States.
Rotation of Crops
A systematic succession of different crops on a given piece of land carried out in order to avoid exhaustion of the soil.
Secondary Activity
Activities which transform the material provided by primary activities into commodities more directly useful to man.
Sedentary Agriculture
Farming practised more or less permanently on the same piece of land, the same as settled agriculture.
Shaft Mine
An underground excavation made deep into the earth for digging minerals like coal, precious stones and iron. Such mines contain vertical and inclined shafts and horizontal tunnels at various levels.
Shifting Agriculture
A method of farming in which a patch of ground is cultivated for a period of few years until the soil is partly exhausted or overrun by weeds, and after which the land is left to natural vegetation while cultivation is carried on elsewhere. In due course, the original patch of land is cultivated again when the natural growth has restored fertility.
Subsistence Agriculture
Farming in which its produce is mainly consumed in the farmer’s household unlike commercial agriculture whose products enter into trade on a very large scale.
Transhumance
A seasonal movement of herdsmen with their livestock and from and to the mountains or between the regions of differing climates.
Transport
The action of carrying persons and goods from one place to another.
Truck Farming
Growing of vegetables around the urban centres to meet the daily demand of the people is known as truck farming. It is governed by the distance a truck can cover overnight between the farm and the market.
Urbanisation
A general movement of people from small rural or agricultural communities or villages to larger towns engaged in varied activities such as government, trade, transport and manufacture. It also indicates the concentration of an increasing proportion of total population in towns and cities.
Reprint 2026-27
