10 STATISTICS FOR ECONOMICS from crop to crop. As these values vary, they are called variable. The variables are generally represented by the letters
X, Y or Z. Each value of a variable is an observation. For example, the food grain production in India varies between 108 million tonnes in 1970–
71 to 272 million tonnes in 2016-17 as shown in the following table. The years are represented by variable X and the production of food grain in India (in million tonnes) is represented by variable Y.
TABLE 2.1
Production of Food Grain in India (Million Tonnes)
1970–71 108
1978–79 132
1990–91 176
1997–98 194
2001–02 212
2015-16 252
2016-17 272
Here, the values of these variables
X and Y are the ‘data’, from which we can obtain information about the production of food grains in India. To know the fluctuations in food grains production, we need the ‘data’ on the production of food grains in India for various years. ‘Data’ is a tool, which helps in understanding problems by providing information.
You must be wondering where do
‘data’ come from and how do we collect these? In the following sections we will discuss the types of data, method and instruments of data collection and sources of obtaining data.
2. WHAT ARE THE SOURCES OF DATA?
Statistical data can be obtained from two sources. The researcher may collect the data by conducting an enquiry. Such data are called Primary
Data, as they are based on first hand information. Suppose, you want to know about the popularity of a filmstar among school students. For this, you will have to enquire from a large number of school students, by asking questions from them to collect the desired information. The data you get, is an example of primary data.
If the data have been collected and processed (scrutinised and tabulated)
by some other agency, they are called
Secondary Data. They can be obtained either from published sources such as government reports, documents, newspapers, books written by economists or from any other source, for example, a website. Thus, the data are primary to the source that collects and processes them for the first time and secondary for all sources that later use such data. Use of secondary data saves time and cost. For example, after collecting the data on the popularity of the filmstar among students, you publish a report. If somebody uses the data collected by you for a similar study, it becomes secondary data.
3. HOW DO WE COLLECT THE DATA?
Do you know how a manufacturer decides about a product or how a political party decides about a candidate? They conduct a survey by
Reprint 2026-27
COLLECTION OF DATA 11 asking questions about a particular product or candidate from a large group of people. The purpose of surveys is to describe some characteristics like price, quality, usefulness (in case of the product) and popularity, honesty, loyalty (in case of the candidate). The purpose of the survey is to collect data.
Survey is a method of gathering information from individuals.
Preparation of Instrument
The most common type of instrument used in surveys is questionnaire/ interview schedule. The questionnaire is either self administered by the respondent or administered by the researcher (enumerator) or trained investigator. While preparing the questionnaire/interview schedule, you should keep in mind the following
• The questionnaire should not be too long. The number of questions s h o u l d b e a s m i n i m u m a s possible.
• The questionnaire should be easy to understand and avoid ambiguous or difficult words.
• The questions should be arranged in an order such that the person answering should feel comfortable.
• The series of questions should move from general to specific. The questionnaire should start from general questions and proceed to more specific ones. For example:
(i) Is increase in electricity charges justified?
(ii) Is the electricity supply in your locality regular?
(i) Is the electricity supply in your locality regular?
(ii) Is increase in electricity charges justified?
• The questions should be precise and clear. For example,
What percentage of your income do you spend on clothing in order to look presentable?
What percentage of your income do you spend on clothing?
• The questions should not be ambiguous. They should enable the respondents to answer quickly, correctly and clearly. For example:
Do you spend a lot of money on books in a month?
(Tick mark the appropriate option)
How much do you spend on books in a month?
(i) Less than Rs 200 (ii) Rs 200–300 (iii) Rs 300–400 (iv) More than Rs 400
• The question should not use double negatives. The questions starting with “Wouldn’t you” or “Don’t you” should be avoided, as they may lead to biased responses. For example:
Reprint 2026-27
12 STATISTICS FOR ECONOMICS
Don’t you think smoking should be prohibited?
Do you think smoking should be prohibited?
• The question should not be a leading question, which gives a clue about how the respondent should answer. For example:
How do you like the flavour of this high- quality tea?
How do you like the flavour of this tea?
• The question should not indicate alternatives to the answer. For example:
Would you like to do a job after college or be a housewife?
What would you like to do after college ?
The questionnaire may consist of closed-ended (or structured) questions or open-ended (or unstructured)
questions. The above question about what a student wants do after college is an open-ended question.
Closed-ended or structured questions can either be a two-way question or a multiple choice question.
When there are only two possible answers, ‘yes’ or ‘no’, it is called a two- way question.
When there is a possibility of more than two options of answers, multiple choice questions are more appropriate.
Example,
Q. Why did you sell your land?
(i) To pay off the debts.
(ii) To finance children’s education.
(iii) To invest in another property.
(iv) Any other (please specify).
Closed-ended questions are easy to use, score and to codify for analysis, because all respondents can choose from the given options. But they are difficult to write as the alternatives should be clearly written to represent both sides of the issue. There is also a possibility that an individual’s true response is not present among the options given. For this, the choice of
‘Any Other’ is provided, where the respondent can write a response, which was not anticipated by the researcher.
Moreover, another limitation of multiple-choice questions is that they tend to restrict the answers by providing alternatives, without which the respondents may have answered differently.
Open-ended questions allow for more individualised responses, but they are difficult to interpret and hard to score, since there are a lot of variations in the responses. Example,
Q. What is your view about globalisation?
Mode of Data Collection
Have you ever come across a television show in which reporters ask questions from children, housewives or general public regarding their examination performance or a brand of soap or a
Reprint 2026-27
COLLECTION OF DATA 13 political party? The purpose of asking questions is to do a survey for collection of data. There are three basic ways of collecting data: (i) Personal Interviews, (ii) Mailing (questionnaire) Surveys, and (iii) Telephone Interviews.
Personal Interviews
This method is used when the researcher has access to all the members. The researcher (or i n v e s t i g a t o r )
conducts face- to-face interviews with the respondents.
Personal interviews are preferred due to various reasons. Personal contact is made between the respondent and the interviewer. The interviewer has the opportunity of explaining the study and answering the queries of respondents. The interviewer can request the respondent to expand on answers that are particularly important. Misinterpretation and misunderstanding can be avoided.
Watching the reactions of respondents can provide supplementary information.
Personal interview has some demerits too. It is expensive, as it requires trained interviewers. It takes longer time to complete the survey.
Presence of the researcher may inhibit respondents from saying what they really think.
Mailing Questionnaire
When the data in a survey are collected by mail, the questionnaire is sent to each individual by mail with a request to complete and return it by a given date. The advantages of this method are that, it is less expensive. It allows the researcher to have access to people in remote areas too, who might be difficult to reach in person or by telephone. It does not allow influencing of the respondents by the interviewer. It also permits the respondents to take sufficient time to give thoughtful answers to the questions.
These days online surveys or surveys through short messaging service, i.e., SMS are popular. Do you know how an online survey is conducted?
The disadvantages of mail survey are that there is less opportunity to provide assistance in clarifying instructions, so there is a possibility of misunderstanding the questions.
Mailing is also likely to produce low response rates due to certain factors, such as returning the questionnaire without completing it, not returning the questionnaire at all, loss of questionnaire in the mail itself, etc.
Telephone Interviews
In a telephone interview, the investigator asks questions over the
Reprint 2026-27
14 STATISTICS FOR ECONOMICS telephone. The advantages of telephone interviews are that they are cheaper than personal interviews and can be conducted in a shorter time. They allow the researcher to assist the respondent by clarifying the questions. Telephonic interview is better in cases where the respondents are reluctant to answer certain questions in personal interviews.
The disadvantage of this method is access to people, as many people may not own telephones.
Pilot Survey
Once the questionnaire is ready, it is advisable to conduct a try-out with a small group which is known as Pilot
Survey or Pre-testing of the questionnaire. The pilot survey helps in providing a preliminary idea about the survey. It helps in pre-testing of the questionnaire, so as to know the shortcomings and drawbacks of the questions. Pilot survey also helps in assessing the suitability of questions, clarity of instructions, performance of enumerators and the cost and time involved in the actual survey.
Activities
• You have to collect information from a person, who lives in a remote village of India. Which mode of data collection will be appropriate and why? Discuss.
• You have to interview the parents about the quality of teaching in a school. If the principal of the school is present there, what types of problems can arise?
Disadvantages
• Most expensive
• Possibility of influencing respondents
• More time-taking.
• Cannot be used by illiterates
• Long response time
• Does not allow explanation of unambiguous questions
• Reactions cannot be watched.
Advantages
• Highest Response Rate
• Allows use of all types of questions
• Better for using open-ended questions
• Allows clarification of ambiguous questions.
• Least expensive
• Only method to reach remote
• No influence on respondents
• Maintains anonymity of respondents
• Best for sensitive questions.
Personal Interview
• Relatively low cost
• Relatively less influence on respondents
• Relatively high response rate.
• Limited use
• Reactions cannot be watched
• Possibility of influencing respondents.
Telephonic Interviews
Mailed Interview
Reprint 2026-27
COLLECTION OF DATA 15
4. CENSUS AND SAMPLE SURVEYS
Census or Complete Enumeration
A survey, which includes every element of the population, is known as Census or the Method of Complete
Enumeration. If certain agencies are interested in studying the total population in India, they have to obtain information from all the households in rural and urban India.
It is carried out every ten years. A house-to-house enquiry is carried out, covering all households in India.
Demographic data on birth and death rates, literacy, employment, life expectancy, size and composition of population, etc., are collected and published by the Registrar General of
India. The last Census of India was held in 2011.
According to the Census 2011, population of India was 121.09 crore, which was 102.87 crore in 2001.
Census 1901 indicated that the population of the country was 23.83 crore. Since then, in a period of 110 years, the population of the country has increased by more than 97 crore. The average annual growth rate of population which was 2.2 per cent per year in the decade 1971-81 came down to 1.97 per cent in 1991-2001 and
1.64 per cent during 2001-2011.
Population and Sample
Population or the Universe in statistics means totality of the items under study.
Thus, the Population or the Universe is a group to which the results of the study are intended to apply. A population is always all the individuals/items who possess certain characteristics (or a set of characteristics), according to the purpose of the survey. The first task in selecting a sample is to identify the population. Once the population is identified, the researcher selects a method of studying it. If the researcher finds that survey of the whole population is not possible, then he/ she may decide to select a
Representative Sample. A sample refers to a group or section of the population from which information is to be obtained. A good sample (representative sample) is generally smaller than the population and is capable of providing reasonably accurate information about the population at a much lower cost and shorter time.
Reprint 2026-27
16 STATISTICS FOR ECONOMICS
Now the question is how do you do the sampling? There are two main types of sampling, random and non-random.
Activities
• In which years will the next
Census be held in India and
• If you have to study the opinion of students about the new economics textbook of class XI, what will be your population and
• If a researcher wants to estimate the average yield of wheat in Punjab, what will be her/his population and sample?
The following description will make their distinction clear.
Random Sampling
As the name suggests, random sampling is one where the individual units from the population (samples)
are selected at random. The government wants to determine the impact of the rise in petrol price on the household budget of a particular locality. For this, a representative (random) sample of 30 households has to be taken and studied. The names of all 300 households of that area are written on paper and mixed, then 30 names to be interviewed are selected one by one.
In random sampling, every individual has an equal chance of being selected. In the above example, all 300 sampling units (also called sampling frame) of the population got an equal chance of being included in
Suppose you want to study the average income of people in a certain region. According to the Census method, you would be required to find out the income of every individual in the region, add them up and divide by number of individuals to get the average income of people in the region.
This method would require huge expenditure, as a large number of enumerators have to be employed.
Alternatively, you select a representative sample, of a few individuals, from the region and find out their income. The average income of the selected group of individuals is used as an estimate of average income of the individuals of the entire region.
• Research problem: To study the economic condition of agricultural labourers in Churachandpur district of
Manipur.
• Population: All agricultural labourers in Churachandpur district.
• Sample: Ten per cent of the agricultural labourers in
Churachandpur district.
Most of the surveys are sample surveys. These are preferred in statistics because of a number of reasons. A sample can provide reasonably reliable and accurate information at a lower cost and shorter time. As samples are smaller than population, more detailed information can be collected by conducting intensive enquiries. As we need a smaller team of enumerators, it is easier to train them and supervise their work more effectively.
Reprint 2026-27
COLLECTION OF DATA 17 the sample of 30 units and hence the sample, such drawn, is a random sample. This is also called lottery method. Nowadays computer programmes are used to select random samples.
Exit Polls
You must have seen that when an election takes place, the television networks provide election coverage.
They also try to predict the results.
This is done through exit polls, wherein a random sample of voters who exit the polling booths are asked whom they voted for. From the data of the sample of voters, the prediction is made. You might have noticed that exit polls do not always predict correctly. Why?
Using the Random Number
Tables, how will you select your sample years?
Non-Random Sampling
There may be a situation that you have to select 10 out of 100 households in a locality. You have to decide which household to select and which to reject.
You may select the households conveniently situated or the households known to you or your friend. In this case, you are using your judgement (bias) in selecting 10 households. This way of selecting 10 out of 100 households is not a random selection. In a non-random sampling method all the units of the population do not have an equal chance of being selected and convenience or judgement of the investigator plays an important role in selection of the sample. They are mainly selected on the basis of judgment, purpose, convenience or quota and are non- random samples.
5. SA M P L I N G A N D NO N -SA M P L I N G
Sampling Errors
A population consisting of numerical values has two important characteristics which are of relevance here. First, Central Tendency which may be measured by the mean, the median or the mode. Second,
Dispersion, which can be measured by caculating the “standard deviation”,
‘‘ mean deviation”, “ range”, etc.
A non-rep
