In this chapter…
The first few years in the life of independent India were full of challenges.
Some of the most pressing ones concerned national unity and territorial integrity of India. We begin the story of politics in India since
Independence by looking at how three of these challenges of nation- building were successfully negotiated in the first decade after 1947.
• Freedom came with partition, which resulted in large scale violence and displacement and challenged the very idea of a secular India.
• The integration of the princely states into the Indian union needed urgent resolution.
• The internal boundaries of the country needed to be drawn afresh to meet the aspirations of the people who spoke different languages.
In the next two chapters we shall turn to other kinds of challenges faced by the country in this early phase.
Credit: Sunil Janah
In a moment of optimism, Hindus and
Hindus and Muslims in
Kolkata in 1947 marked the end of communal violence by jointly flying the flags of India and
Pakistan from trucks patrolling the city.
This rare photograph captured the joy of freedom and the tragedy of partition in India and in Pakistan.
Reprint 2026-27
Challenges for the new nation-state
At the hour of midnight on 14-15 August 1947, India attained independence.
Jawaharlal Nehru, the first prime minister of free India, addressed a special session of the Constituent Assembly that night. This was the famous ‘tryst with destiny’ speech that you are familiar with.
This was the moment Indians had been waiting for. You have read in your history textbooks that there were many voices in our national movement. But there were two goals almost everyone agreed upon: one, that after Independence, we shall run our country through democratic government; and two, that the government will be run for the good of all, particularly the poor and the socially disadvantaged groups.
Now that the country was independent, the time had come to realise the promise of freedom.
This was not going to be easy. India was born as a nation-state in very difficult circumstances. perhaps no other country by then was born in a situation more difficult than that of India in 1947. Freedom came with the partition of the country.
The year 1947 was a year of unprecedented violence and trauma of displacement. It was in this situation that independent India started on its journey to achieve several objectives. Yet the turmoil that accompanied independence did not make our leaders lose sight of the multiple challenges that faced the new nation.
prime minister Jawahar
Lal Nehru speaking from the red Fort,
15 August 1947
1chapter challenges of nation Building
Reprint 2026-27
4 Politics in India since Independence
Three Challenges
Broadly, independent India faced three kinds of challenges. The first and the immediate challenge was to shape a nation that was united, yet accommodative of the diversity in our society. India was a land of continental size and diversity. Its people spoke different languages and followed different cultures and religions. At that time it was widely believed that a country full of such kinds of diversity could not remain together for long. The partition of the country appeared to prove everyone’s worst fears. There were serious questions about the future of India: Would India survive as a unified country? Would it do so by emphasising national unity at the cost of every other objective?
Would it mean rejecting all regional and sub-national identities? And there was an urgent question: How was integration of the territory of
India to be achieved?
The second challenge was to establish democracy. You have already studied the Indian Constitution. You know that the
Constitution granted fundamental rights and extended the right to vote to every citizen. India adopted representative democracy based on the parliamentary form of government. These features ensure that the political competition would take place in a democratic framework.
Hindustan Times, 19 July 1947
Tomorrow we shall be free from the slavery of the
British domination. But at midnight India will be partitioned. Tomorrow will thus be a day of rejoicing as well as of mourning.
Mahatma Gandhi
14 August 1947,
Kolkata.
Reprint 2026-27
Challenges of Nation Building 5
A democratic constitution is necessary but not sufficient for establishing a democracy. The challenge was to develop democratic practices in accordance with the Constitution.
The third challenge was to ensure the development and well- being of the entire society and not only of some sections. Here again the Constitution clearly laid down the principle of equality and special protection to socially disadvantaged groups and religious and cultural communities. The Constitution also set out in the Directive Principles of State Policy the welfare goals that democratic politics must achieve. The real challenge now was to evolve effective policies for economic development and eradication of poverty.
How did independent India respond to these challenges? To what extent did India succeed in achieving the various objectives set out by the Constitution? This entire book is an attempt to respond to these questions. The book tells the story of politics in
India since Independence so as to equip you to develop your own answers to big questions like these. In the first three chapters we look at how the three challenges mentioned above were faced in the early years after Independence.
In this chapter, we focus on the first challenge of nation- building that occupied centre-stage in the years immediately after
Independence. We begin by looking at the events that formed the context of Independence. This can help us understand why the issue of national unity and security became a primary challenge at the time of Independence. We shall then see how India chose to shape itself into a nation, united by a shared history and common destiny. This unity had to reflect the aspirations of people across the different regions and deal with the disparities that existed among regions and different sections of people. In the next two chapters we shall turn to the challenge of establishing a democracy and achieving economic development with equality and justice.
I always wanted a time machine, so that I can go back and participate in the celebrations of
15 August 1947. But this looks different from what I thought.
These three stamps were issued in 1950 to mark the first republic Day on 26 January 1950. What do the images on these stamps tell you about the challenges to the new republic? If you were asked to design these stamps in 1950, which images would you have chosen?
Reprint 2026-27
6 Politics in India since Independence
The Dawn of Freedom
Faiz Ahmed Faiz
This scarred, marred brightness, this bitten-by-night dawn -
The one that was awaited, surely, this is not that dawn.
This is not the dawn yearning for which
Had we set out, friends, hoping to find sometime, somewhere
The final destination of stars in the wilderness of the sky.
Somewhere, at least, must be a shore for the languid waves of the night,
Somewhere at least must anchor the sad boat of the heart …
Translation of an extract from urdu poem Subh-e-azadi
We should begin to work in that spirit and in course of time all these angularities of the majority and minority communities, the Hindu community and the Muslim community – because even as regards Muslims you have pathans, punjabis, Shias, Sunnis and so on and among the Hindus you have
Brahmins, Vaishnavas, Khatris, also Bengalees, Madrasis, and so on – will vanish. … You are free; you are free to go to your temples, you are free to go to your mosques or to any other place of worship in this State of pakistan.
You may belong to any religion or caste or creed – that has nothing to do with the business of the State.
Mohammad Ali Jinnah, Presidential Address to the Constituent Assembly of Pakistan at
Karachi, 11 August 1947.
Faiz Ahmed Faiz (1911-1984) Born in Sialkot; stayed in Pakistan after
Partition. A leftist in his political leanings, he opposed the Pakistani regime and was imprisoned. Collections of his poetry include Naksh-e-Fariyadi,
Dast-e-Saba and Zindan-Nama.
Regarded as one of the greatest poets of South Asia in the twentieth century.
Dawn, Karachi, 14 August 1947
Reprint 2026-27
Challenges of Nation Building 7
Today I call Waris Shah
Amrita Pritam
Today, I call Waris Shah, “Speak from your grave”
And turn, today, the book of love’s next affectionate page
Once, a daughter of punjab cried and you wrote a wailing saga
Today, a million daughters, cry to you, Waris Shah
Rise! O’ narrator of the grieving; rise! look at your punjab
Today, fields are lined with corpses, and blood fills the Chenab
Someone has mixed poison in the five rivers’ flow
Their deadly water is, now, irrigating our lands galore
This fertile land is sprouting, venom from every pore
The sky is turning red from endless cries of gore
The toxic forest wind, screams from inside its wake
Turning each flute’s bamboo-shoot, into a deadly snake …
Translation of an extract from a Punjabi poem “Aaj Akhan Waris Shah Nun”
We have a Muslim minority who are so large in numbers that they cannot, even if they want, go anywhere else. That is a basic fact about which there can be no argument. Whatever the provocation from pakistan and whatever the indignities and horrors inflicted on non-Muslims there, we have got to deal with this minority in a civilised manner. We must give them security and the rights of citizens in a democratic State. If we fail to do so, we shall have a festering sore which will eventually poison the whole body politic and probably destroy it.
Jawaharlal Nehru, Letter to Chief Ministers, 15 October 1947.
Amrita Pritam (1919–2005):
A prominent Punjabi poet and fiction writer. Recipient of Sahitya
Akademi Award, Padma Shree and
Jnanapeeth Award. After Partition she made Delhi her second home.
She was active in writing and editing ‘Nagmani’ a Punjabi monthly magazine till her last.
The Times of India, Bombay, 15 August 1947
Reprint 2026-27
8 Politics in India since Independence
Partition: displacement and rehabilitation
On 14-15 August 1947, not one but two nation-states came into existence – India and Pakistan. This was a result of ‘partition’, the division of British India into India and Pakistan. The drawing of the border demarcating the territory of each country marked the culmination of political developments that you have read about in the history textbooks. According to the ‘two-nation theory’ advanced by the Muslim League, India consisted of not one but two ‘people’,
Hindus and Muslims. That is why it demanded Pakistan, a separate country for the Muslims. The Congress opposed this theory and the demand for Pakistan. But several political developments in 1940s, the political competition between the Congress and the Muslim League and the British role led to the decision for the creation of Pakistan.
Process of Partition
Thus it was decided that what was till then known as ‘India’ would be divided into two countries, ‘India’ and ‘Pakistan’. Such a division was not only very painful, but also very difficult to decide and to implement. It was decided to follow the principle of religious majorities. This basically means that areas where the Muslims were in majority would make up the territory of Pakistan. The rest was to stay with India.
The idea might appear simple, but it presented all kinds of difficulties. First of all, there was no single belt of Muslim majority areas in British India. There were two areas of concentration, one in the west and one in the east. There was no way these two parts could be joined. So it was decided that the new country, Pakistan, will comprise two territories, West and East Pakistan separated by a long expanse of Indian territory. Secondly, not all Muslim majority areas wanted to be in Pakistan. Khan Abdul Gaffar Khan, the undisputed leader of the North Western Frontier Province and known as ‘Frontier
Gandhi’, was staunchly opposed to the two-nation theory. Eventually, his voice was simply ignored and the NWFP was made to merge with Pakistan.
The third problem was that two of the Muslim majority provinces of British India, Punjab and Bengal, had very large areas where the non-Muslims were in majority. Eventually it was decided that these two provinces would be bifurcated according to the religious majority at the district or even lower level. This decision could not be made by the midnight of 14-15 August. It meant that a large number of people did not know on the day of Independence whether they were in
India or in Pakistan. The Partition of these two provinces caused the deepest trauma of Partition.
This was related to the fourth and the most intractable of all the problems of partition. This was the problem of ‘minorities’ on both
Oh, now I understand! What was ‘East’ Bengal has now become
Bangladesh. That is why our Bengal is called ‘West’ Bengal!
Reprint 2026-27
Challenges of Nation Building 9 sides of the border. Lakhs of Hindus and Sikhs in the areas that were now in Pakistan and an equally large number of Muslims on the Indian side of Punjab and Bengal (and to some extent Delhi and surrounding areas) found themselves trapped. They were to discover that they were undesirable aliens in their own home, in the land where they and their ancestors had lived for centuries. As soon as it became clear that the country was going to be partitioned, the violence started at an unprecedented level against communities who were lesser in number in their respective areas. No one had quite anticipated the scale of this problem. No one had any plans for handling this. Initially, the people and political leaders kept hoping that this violence was temporary and would be controlled soon. But very soon the violence went out of control. Such communities on both sides of the border were often compelled to leave their homes at a few hours’ notice.
Consequences of partition
The year 1947 was the year of one of the largest, most abrupt, unplanned and tragic transfer of population that human history has known. There were killings and atrocities on both sides of the border. In the name of religion people of one community ruthlessly killed and maimed people of the other community. Cities like Lahore,
A train full of ‘refugees’ in 1947.
Credit: DPA.
Reprint 2026-27
10 Politics in India since Independence
Amritsar and Kolkata became divided into
‘communal zones’. Muslims would avoid going into an area where mainly Hindus or Sikhs lived; similarly the Hindus and
Sikhs stayed away from areas of Muslim predominance.
Forced to abandon their homes and move across borders, people went through immense sufferings. Minorities on both sides of the border fled their home and often secured temporary shelter in ‘refugee camps’. They often found unhelpful local administration and police in what was till recently their own country. They travelled to the other side of the new border by all sorts of means, often by foot. Even during this journey they were often attacked, killed or raped. Thousands of women were abducted. They were made to convert to the religion of the abductor and were forced into marriage. In many cases women were killed by their own family members to preserve the ‘family honour’. Many children were separated from their parents. Those who did manage to cross the border found that they had no home. For lakhs of these ‘refugees’ the country’s freedom meant life in ‘refugee camps’, for months and sometimes for years.
Writers, poets and film-makers in India and
Pakistan have expressed the ruthlessness of the killings and the suffering of displacement and violence in their novels, short-stories, poems and films. While recounting the trauma of Partition, they have often used the phrase that the survivors themselves used to describe Partition — as a ‘division of hearts’.
The Partition was not merely a division of properties, liabilities
Hospitality Delayed
Saadat Hasan Manto
Rioters brought the running train to a halt.
People belonging to the other community were pulled out and slaughtered with swords and bullets.
The remaining passengers were treated to halwa, fruits and milk.
The chief organiser said, ‘Brothers and sisters, news of this train’s arrival was delayed. That is why we have not been able to entertain you lavishly – the way we wanted to.’
Source: English translation of Urdu short story Kasre-Nafsi
Gandhi in Noakhali (now in Bangladesh) in 1947.
Credit: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library
Reprint 2026-27
Challenges of Nation Building 11 and assets, or a political division of the country and the administrative apparatus. What also got divided were the financial assets, and things like tables, chairs, typewriters, paper-clips, books and also musical instruments of the police band! The employees of the government and the railways were also ‘divided’. Above all, it was a violent separation of communities who had hitherto lived together as neighbours.
It is estimated that the Partition forced about 80 lakh people to migrate across the new border. Between five to ten lakh people were killed in Partition related violence.
Beyond the administrative concerns and financial strains, however, the
Partition posed another deeper issue.
The leaders of the Indian national struggle did not believe in the two-nation theory. And yet, partition on religious basis had taken place. Did that make
India a Hindu nation automatically?
Even after large scale migration of
Muslims to the newly created Pakistan, the Muslim population in India accounted for 10-12 per cent of the total population in 1951. So, how would the government of India treat its Muslim citizens and other religious minorities (Sikhs, Christians, Jains, Buddhists,
Parsis and Jews)? The Partition had already created severe conflict between the two communities.
There were competing political interests behind these conflicts. The
Muslim League was formed
