16 Politics in India since Independence of Hyderabad made a similar announcement the next day. Rulers like the Nawab of Bhopal were averse to joining the Constituent Assembly.
This response of the rulers of the Princely States meant that after
Independence there was a very real possibility that India would get further divided into a number of small countries. The prospects of democracy for the people in these states also looked bleak. This was a strange situation, since the Indian Independence was aimed at unity, self-determination as well as democracy. In most of these princely states, governments were run in a non-democratic manner and the rulers were unwilling to give democratic rights to their populations.
Government’s approach
The interim government took a firm stance against the possible division of India into small principalities of different sizes. Under the Mountbatten Plan, the Princely states were free to join India or Pakistan. Sardar Patel was India’s Deputy Prime Minister and the Home Minister during the crucial period immediately following
Independence. He played a historic role in negotiating with the rulers of princely states firmly but diplomatically and bringing most of them into the Indian Union. It may look easy now. But it was a very complicated task which required skilful persuasion. For instance, there were 26 small states in today’s Orissa. Saurashtra region of
Gujarat had 14 big states, 119 small states and numerous other different administrations.
The government’s approach was guided by three considerations.
Firstly, the people of most of the princely states clearly wanted to become part of the Indian union. Secondly, the government was prepared to be flexible in giving autonomy to some regions. The idea was to accommodate plurality and adopt a flexible approach in dealing with the demands of the regions. Thirdly, in the backdrop of Partition which brought into focus the contest over demarcation of territory, the integration and consolidation of the territorial boundaries of the nation had assumed supreme importance.
Before 15 August 1947, peaceful negotiations had brought almost all states whose territories were contiguous to the new boundaries of
India, into the Indian Union. The rulers of most of the states signed a document called the ‘Instrument of Accession’ which meant that their state agreed to become a part of the Union of India. Accession of the Princely States of Junagadh, Hyderabad, Kashmir and Manipur proved more difficult than the rest. The issue of Junagarh was resolved after a plebiscite confirmed people’s desire to join India. You will read about Kashmir in Chapter Seven. Here, let us look at the cases of Hyderabad and Manipur.
We are at a momentous stage in the history of India.
By common endeavour, we can raise the country to new greatness, while lack of unity will expose us to unexpected calamities. I hope the Indian States will realise fully that if we do not cooperate and work together in the general interest, anarchy and chaos will overwhelm us all, great and small, and lead us to total ruin...
Sardar Patel
Letter to Princely rulers,
Reprint 2026-27
Challenges of Nation Building 17
Hyderabad
Hyderabad, the largest of the Princely States was surrounded entirely by Indian territory. Some parts of the old Hyderabad state are today parts of Maharashtra,
Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh. Its ruler carried the title,
‘Nizam’, and he was one of the world’s richest men. The
Nizam wanted an independent status for Hyderabad. He entered into what was called the Standstill Agreement with
India in November 1947 for a year while negotiations with the Indian government were going on.
In the meantime, a movement of the people of
Hyderabad State against the Nizam’s rule gathered force.
The peasantry in the Telangana region in particular, was the victim of Nizam’s oppressive rule and rose against him.
Women who had seen the worst of this oppression joined the movement in large numbers. Hyderabad town was the nerve centre of this movement. The Communists and the
Hyderabad Congress were in the forefront of the movement.
The Nizam responded by unleashing a para-military force known as the razakars on the people. The atrocities and communal nature of the razakars knew no bounds. They
Sardar Patel with the Nizam of Hyderabad
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel (1875-1950): Leader of the freedom movement;
Congress leader; follower of
Mahatma Gandhi; Deputy prime Minister and first Home
Minister of independent India;
played an important role in the integration of princely
States with India; member of important committees of the Constituent Assembly on Fundamental Rights,
Minorities, provincial
Constitution, etc.
Credit: PIB
Reprint 2026-27
18 Politics in India since Independence
Credit: R. K. Laxman in the Times of India murdered, maimed, raped and looted, targeting particularly the non-
Muslims. The central government had to order the army to tackle the situation. In September 1948, Indian army moved in to control the
Nizam’s forces. After a few days of intermittent fighting, the Nizam surrendered. This led to Hyderabad’s accession to India.
A few days before Independence, the Maharaja of Manipur,
Bodhachandra Singh, signed the Instrument of Accession with the
Indian government on the assurance that the internal autonomy of
Manipur would be maintained. Under the pressure of public opinion, the Maharaja held elections in Manipur in June 1948 and the state became a constitutional monarchy. Thus Manipur was the first part of India to hold an election based on universal adult franchise.
In the Legislative Assembly of Manipur there were sharp differences over the question of merger of Manipur with India. While the state
Congress wanted the merger, other political parties were opposed to this. The Government of India succeeded in persuading the Maharaja into signing a Merger Agreement in September 1949.
I wonder what happened to all those hundreds of kings, queens, princes and princesses. How did they live their lives after becoming just ordinary citizens?
This cartoon comments on the relation between the people and the rulers in the
Princely States, and also on
Patel’s approach to resolving this
Reprint 2026-27
Challenges of Nation Building 19
Reorganisation of States
The process of nation-building did not come to an end with Partition and integration of Princely States. Now the challenge was to draw the internal boundaries of the Indian states. This was not just a matter of administrative divisions. The boundaries had to be drawn in a way so that the linguistic and cultural plurality of the country could be reflected without affecting the unity of the nation.
During colonial rule, the state boundaries were drawn either on administrative convenience or simply coincided with the territories annexed by the British government or the territories ruled by the princely powers.
Our national movement had rejected these divisions as artificial and had promised the linguistic principle as the basis of formation of states. In fact after the Nagpur session of Congress in 1920 the principle was recognised as the basis of the reorganisation of the
Indian National Congress party itself. Many Provincial Congress
Committees were created by linguistic zones, which did not follow the administrative divisions of British India.
Things changed after Independence and Partition. Our leaders felt that carving out states on the basis of language might lead to disruption and disintegration. It was also felt that this would draw attention away from other social and economic challenges that the country faced. The central leadership decided to postpone matters.
The need for postponement was also felt because the fate of the
Princely States had not been decided. Also, the memory of Partition was still fresh.
This decision of the national leadership was challenged by the local leaders and the people. Protests began in the Telugu speaking areas of the old Madras province, which included present day Tamil Nadu, parts of Andhra Pradesh, Kerala and Karnataka. The Vishalandhra movement (as the movement for a separate Andhra was called) demanded that the Telugu speaking areas should be separated from the Madras province of which they were a part and be made into a separate Andhra province. Nearly all the political forces in the Andhra region were in favour of linguistic reorganisation of the then Madras province.
The movement gathered momentum as a result of the Central government’s vacillation. Potti Sriramulu, a Congress leader and a veteran Gandhian, went on an indefinite fast that led to his death after
56 days. This caused great unrest and resulted in violent outbursts in
Andhra region. People in large numbers took to the streets. Many were injured or lost their lives in police firing. In Madras, several legislators resigned their seats in protest. Finally, the Prime Minister announced the formation of a separate Andhra state in December 1952.
“ “..if lingusitic provinces are formed, it will also give a fillip to the regional languages. It would be absurd to make
Hindustani the medium of instruction in all the regions and it is still more absurd to use English for this purpose.
Mahatma Gandhi
January1948
Reprint 2026-27
20 Politics in India since Independence read the map and answer the following questions:
1. Name the original state from which the following states were carved out:
Gujarat Haryana
Meghalaya Chhattisgarh
2. Name two states that were affected by the Partition of the country.
3. Name two states today that were once a Union Territory.
Note: This illustration is not a map drawn to scale and should not be taken to be an authentic depiction of India’s external boundaries.
Reprint 2026-27
Challenges of Nation Building 21
The formation of Andhra spurred the struggle for making of other states on linguistic lines in other parts of the country. These struggles forced the Central
Government into appointing a States reorganisation
Commission in 1953 to look into the question of redrawing of the boundaries of states. The Commission in its report accepted that the boundaries of the state should reflect the boundaries of different languages. On the basis of its report the States reorganisation Act was passed in 1956. This led to the creation of 14 states and six union territories.
Now, isn’t this very interesting? Nehru and other leaders were very popular, and yet the people did not hesitate to agitate for linguistic states against the wishes of the leaders!
Potti Sriramulu (1901-1952): Gandhian worker; left government job to participate in
Salt Satyagraha; also participated in individual
Satyagraha; went on a fast in 1946 demanding that temples in Madras province be opened to dalits; undertook a fast unto death from 19 October 1952 demanding separate state of Andhra; died during the fast on 15 December 1952.
Credit: Shankar
“Struggle for Survival” (26 July 1953) captures contemporary impression of the demand for linguistic states
Reprint 2026-27
22 Politics in India since Independence
One of the most important concerns in the early years was that demands for separate states would endanger the unity of the country. It was felt that linguistic states may foster separatism and create pressures on the newly founded nation. But the leadership, under popular pressure, finally made a choice in favour of linguistic states. It was hoped that if we accept the regional and linguistic claims of all regions, the threat of division and separatism would be reduced. Besides, the accommodation of regional demands and the formation of linguistic states were also seen as more democratic.
Now it is more than fifty years since the formation of linguistic states. We can say that linguistic states and the movements for the formation of these states changed the nature of democratic politics and leadership in some basic ways. The path to politics and power was now open to people other than the small English speaking elite. Linguistic reorganisation also gave some uniform basis to the drawing of state boundaries. It did not lead
Credit: Shankar
“Coaxing the Genie back” (5 February 1956) asked if the State reorganisation Commission could contain the genie of linguism.
Reprint 2026-27
Challenges of Nation Building 23 to disintegration of the country as many had feared earlier. On the contrary it strengthened national unity.
Above all, the linguistic states underlined the acceptance of the principle of diversity. When we say that India adopted democracy, it does not simply mean that India embraced a democratic constitution, nor does it merely mean that India adopted the format of elections. The choice was larger than that. It was a choice in favour of recognising and accepting the existence of differences which could at times be oppositional. Democracy, in other words, was associated with plurality of ideas and ways of life. Much of the politics in the later period was to take place within this framework.
Fast Forward Creation of new states
The acceptance of the principle of linguistic states did not mean, however, that all states immediately became linguistic states. There was an experiment of ‘bilingual’ Bombay state, consisting of Gujarati- and Marathi-speaking people. After a popular agitation, the states of
Maharashtra and Gujarat were created in 1960.
In punjab also, there were two linguistic groups: Hindi-speaking and punjabi-speaking. The punjabi-speaking people demanded a separate state. But it was not granted with other states in 1956. Statehood for punjab came ten years later, in 1966, when the territories of today’s
Haryana and Himachal pradesh were separated from the larger punjab state.
Another major reorganisation of states took place in the north-east in 1972. Meghalaya was carved out of Assam in 1972. Manipur and Tripura too emerged as separate states in the same year. The states of Mizoram and Arunachal pradesh came into being in 1987. Nagaland had become a state much earlier in 1963.
Language did not, however, remain the sole basis of organisation of states. In later years sub-regions raised demands for separate states on the basis of a separate regional culture or complaints of regional imbalance in development. Three such states, Chhattisgarh, Uttarakhand and Jharkhand, were created in 2000. Telangana has emerged as a new state on 2 June, 2014.
The story of reorganisation has not come to an end. There are many regions in the country where there are movements demanding separate and smaller states. These include Vidarbha in Maharashtra, Harit pradesh in the western region of Uttar pradesh and the northern region of West Bengal.
The US has one-fourth of our population but 50 states. Why can’t India have more than 100
Reprint 2026-27
24 Politics in India since Independence
1. Which among the following statements about the partition is incorrect?
(a) partition of India was the outcome of the “two-nation theory.” (b) punjab and Bengal were the two provinces divided on the basis of religion.
(c) East pakistan and West pakistan were not contiguous.
(d) The scheme of partition included a plan for transfer of population across the border.
2. Match the principles with the instances:
(a) Mapping of boundaries i. pakistan and on religious grounds Bangladesh (b) Mapping of boundaries on grounds ii. India and of different languages pakistan (c) Demarcating boundaries within a iii. Jharkhand and country by geographical zones Chhattisgarh (d) Demarcating boundaries within a iv. Himachal pradesh country on administrative and and Uttarakhand political grounds
3. Take a current political map of India (showing outlines of states) and mark the location of the following princely States.
(a) Junagadh (b) Manipur (c) Mysore (d) Gwalior
4. Here are two opinions –
Bismay: “The merger with the Indian State was an extension of democracy to the people of the Princely States.”
Inderpreet: “I am not so sure, there was force being used. Democracy comes by creating consensus.”
What is your own opinion in the light of accession of princely States and the responses of the people in these parts?
5. Read the following very different statements made in August 1947 –
“Today you have worn on your heads a crown of thorns. The seat of power is a nasty thing. You have to remain ever wakeful on that seat….
you have to be more humble and forbearing…now there will be no end to your being tested.” — M.K Gandhi
“…India will awake to a life of freedom….we step out from the old to the new…we end today a period of ill fortune and India discovers herself again. The achievement we celebrate today is but a step, an opening of opportunity…” — Jawaharlal nehru
Spell out the agenda of nation building that flows from these two statements. Which one appeals more to you and why?
EXERCISES
24 Politics in India since Independence
Reprint 2026-27
Challenges of Nation Building 25
6. What are the reasons being used by Nehru for keeping India secular?
Do you think these reasons were only ethical and sentimental? Or were there some prudential reasons as well?
7. Bring out two major differences between the challenge of nation building for eastern and western regions of the country at the time of
Independence.
8. What was the task of the States Reorganisation Commission? What was its most salient recommendation?
9. It is said that the nation is to a large extent an “ imagined community” held together by common beliefs, history, political aspirations and imaginations. Identify the features that make India a nation.
10. Read the following passage and answer the questions below:
“In the history of nation-building only the Soviet experiment bears comparison with the Indian. There too, a sense of unity had to be forged between many diverse ethnic groups, religious, linguistic communities and social classes. The scale – geographic as well as demographic
– was comparably massive. The raw material the state had to work with was equally unpropitious: a people di
