Credit: Shankar
In this chapter…
The challenge of nation-building, covered in the last chapter, was accompanied by the challenge of instituting democratic politics. Thus, electoral competition among political parties began immediately after
Independence. In this chapter, we look at the first decade of electoral politics in order to understand
• the establishment of a system of free and fair elections;
• the domination of the Congress party in the years immediately after Independence; and
• the emergence of opposition parties and their policies.
This famous sketch by Shankar appeared on the cover of his collection – Don’t Spare
Me, Shankar. The original sketch was drawn in the context of
India’s China policy. But this cartoon captures the dual role of the
Congress during the era of one-party dominance.
Reprint 2026-27
Challenge of building democracy
You now have an idea of the difficult circumstances in which independent India was born. You have read about the serious challenge of nation-building that confronted the country right in the beginning. Faced with such serious challenges, leaders in many other countries of the world decided that their country could not afford to have democracy. They said that national unity was their first priority and that democracy will introduce differences and conflicts.
Therefore many of the countries that gained freedom from colonialism experienced non-democratic rule. It took various forms: nominal democracy but effective control by one leader, one party rule or direct army rule. Non-democratic regimes always started with a promise of restoring democracy very soon. But once they established themselves, it was very difficult to dislodge them.
The conditions in India were not very different. But the leaders of the newly independent India decided to take the more difficult path.
Any other path would have been surprising, for our freedom struggle was deeply committed to the idea of democracy. Our leaders were conscious of the critical role of politics in any democracy. They did not see politics as a problem; they saw it as a way of solving the problems.
Every society needs to decide how it will govern and regulate itself.
There are always different policy alternatives to choose from. There are different groups with different and conflicting aspirations. How do we resolve these differences? Democratic politics is an answer to this question. While competition and power are the two most visible things about politics, the purpose of political activity is and should be deciding and pursuing public interest. This is the route our leaders decided to take.
Last year you studied how our Constitution was drafted.
You would remember that the Constitution was adopted on
26 November 1949 and signed on 24 January 1950 and it came into effect on 26 January 1950. At that time the country was being ruled by an interim government. It was now necessary to install the first democratically elected government of the country. The Constitution had laid down the rules, now the machine had to be put in place.
Initially it was thought that this was only a matter of a few months. The
Election Commission of India was set up in January 1950. Sukumar
Sen became the first Chief Election Commissioner. The country’s first general elections were expected sometime in 1950 itself.
What’s so special about our being a democracy? Sooner or later every country has become a democracy, isn’t it?
In India,….
…hero-worship, plays a part in its politics unequalled in magnitude by the part it plays in the politics of any other country….But in politics, .. ..hero-worship is a sure road to degradation and eventual dictatorship.
Babasaheb Dr. B.R.
Ambedkar
Speech in Constituent
Assembly
25 November 1949
2chapter era of one-party dominance
Reprint 2026-27
28 Politics in India sinc Independence
A cartoonist’s impression of the election committee formed by the Congress to choose party candidates in 1951. On the committee, besides Nehru: Morarji Desai, Rafi Ahmed Kidwai,
Dr B.C. Roy, Kamaraj Nadar, Rajagopalachari, Jagjivan Ram, Maulana Azad, D.P. Mishra,
P.D. Tandon and Govind Ballabh Pant.
But the Election Commission discovered that it was not going to be easy to hold a free and fair election in a country of India’s size.
Holding an election required delimitation or drawing the boundaries of the electoral constituencies. It also required preparing the electoral rolls, or the list of all the citizens eligible to vote. Both these tasks took a lot of time. When the first draft of the rolls was published, it was discovered that the names of nearly 40 lakh women were not recorded in the list. They were simply listed as “wife of …” or “daughter of …”.
The Election Commission refused to accept these entries and ordered a revision if possible and deletion if necessary. Preparing for the first general election was a mammoth exercise. No election on this scale had ever been conducted in the world before. At that time there were 17 crore eligible voters, who had to elect about 3,200 MLAs and
489 Members of Lok Sabha. Only 15 per cent of these eligible voters were literate. Therefore the Election Commission had to think of some special method of voting. The Election Commission trained over 3 lakh officers and polling staff to conduct the elections.
It was not just the size of the country and the electorate that made this election unusual. The first general election was also the first big test of democracy in a poor and illiterate country. Till then democracy had existed only in the prosperous countries, mainly in Europe and
North America, where nearly everyone was literate. By that time many countries in Europe had not given voting rights to all women.
In this context India’s experiment with universal adult franchise
That was a good decision. But what about men who still refer to a woman as
Mrs. Somebody, as if she does not have a name of her own?
Credit: Shankar, 20 May 1951
Reprint 2026-27
Era of One-party Dominance 29
Let’s re-search
Ask the elders in your family and neighbourhood about their experience of participating in elections.
• Did anyone vote in the first or second general election? Who did they vote for and why?
• Is there someone who has used all the three methods of voting?
Which one did they prefer?
• In which ways do they find the elections of those days different from the present ones?
Changing methods of voting
These days we use an Electronic Voting Machine (EVM) to record voters’ preferences. But that is not how we started. In the first general election, it was decided to place inside each polling booth a box for each candidate with the election symbol of that candidate. Each voter was given a blank ballot paper which they had to drop into the box of the candidate they wanted to vote for. About 20 lakh steel boxes were used for this purpose.
A presiding officer from Punjab described how he
A sample of the ballot paper used from the third to the thirteenth elections to Lok prepared the ballot boxes—“Each box had to have its candidate’s symbol, both inside and outside it, and outside on either side, had to be displayed the name of the candidate in Urdu, Hindi and Punjabi along with the number of the constituency, the polling station and the polling booth. The paper seal with the numerical description of the candidate, signed by the presiding officer, had to be inserted in the token frame and its window closed by its door which had to be fixed in its place at the other end by means of a wire. All this had to be done on the day previous to the one fixed for polling. To fix symbols and labels the boxes had first to be rubbed with sandpaper or a piece of brick. I found that it took about five hours for six persons, including my two daughters, to complete this work. All this was done at my house.”
Electronic Voting
After the first two elections, this method was changed. Now the ballot paper carried the names and symbols of all the candidates and the voter was required to put a stamp on the name of the candidate they wanted to vote for. This method worked for nearly forty years. Towards the end of 1990s the Election Commission started using the EVM. By 2004 the entire country had shifted to the EVM.
Reprint 2026-27
30 Politics in India sinc Independence appeared very bold and risky. An Indian editor called it “the biggest gamble in history”. Organiser, a magazine, wrote that Jawaharlal Nehru “would live to confess the failure of universal adult franchise in India”. A British member of the Indian Civil Service claimed that “a future and more enlightened age will view with astonishment the absurd farce of recording the votes of millions of illiterate people”.
The elections had to be postponed twice and finally held from October 1951 to February 1952. But this election is referred to as the 1952 election since most parts of the country voted in January 1952. It took six months for the campaigning, polling and counting to be completed.
Elections were competitive – there were on an average more than four candidates for each seat. The level of participation was encouraging — more than half the eligible voters turned out to vote on the day of elections. When the results were declared these were accepted as fair even by the losers.
The Indian experiment had proved the critics wrong. The
Times of India held that the polls have “confounded all those sceptics who thought the introduction of adult franchise too risky an experiment in this country”. The Hindustan
Times claimed that “there is universal agreement that the
Indian people have conducted themselves admirably in the largest experiment in democratic elections in the history of the world”. Observers outside India were equally impressed.
India’s general election of 1952 became a landmark in the history of democracy all over the world. It was no longer possible to argue that democratic elections could not be held in conditions of poverty or lack of education. It proved that democracy could be practiced anywhere in the world.
Maulana Abul Kalam
Azad (1888-1958):
original name — Abul
Kalam Mohiyuddin
Ahmed; scholar of
Islam; freedom fighter and Congress leader;
proponent of Hindu-
Muslim unity; opposed to Partition; member of
Constituent Assembly;
Education Minister in the first cabinet of free
Congress dominance in the first three general elections
The results of the first general election did not surprise anyone. The
Indian National Congress was expected to win this election. The
Congress party, as it was popularly known, had inherited the legacy of the national movement. It was the only party then to have an organisation spread all over the country. And finally, in Jawaharlal
Nehru, the party had the most popular and charismatic leader in
Indian politics. He led the Congress campaign and toured through the country. When the final results were declared, the extent of the victory of the Congress did surprise many. The party won 364 of the
489 seats in the first Lok Sabha and finished way ahead of any other challenger. The Communist Party of India that came next in terms of seats won only 16 seats. The state elections were held with the
Reprint 2026-27
Era of One-party Dominance 31
Can you identify the places where the Congress had a strong presence?
In which States, did the other parties perform reasonably well?
This illustration is not a map drawn to scale and should not be taken to be an authentic depiction of India’s external boundaries.
Reprint 2026-27
32 Politics in India sinc Independence
Lok Sabha elections. The Congress scored big victory in those elections as well. It won a majority of seats in all the states except
Travancore-Cochin (part of today’s Kerala),
Madras and Orissa. Finally even in these states the Congress formed the government.
So the party ruled all over the country at the national and the state level. As expected,
Jawaharlal Nehru became the Prime Minister after the first general election.
A look at the electoral map on the previous page would give you a sense of the dominance of the Congress during the period 1952-1962. In the second and the third general elections, held in 1957 and 1962 respectively, the Congress maintained the same position in the Lok
Sabha by winning three-fourth of the seats. None of the opposition parties could win even one-tenth of the number of seats won by the Congress. In the state assembly elections, the Congress did not get majority in a few cases. The most significant of these cases was in Kerala in 1957 when a coalition led by the
CPI formed the government. Apart from exceptions like this, the
Congress controlled the national and all the state governments.
The extent of the victory of the Congress was artificially boosted by our electoral system. The Congress won three out of every four seats but it did not get even half of the votes. In 1952, for example, the Congress obtained 45 per cent of the total votes.
But it managed to win 74 per cent of the seats. The Socialist
Party, the second largest party in terms of votes, secured more than 10 per cent of the votes all over the country. But it could not even win three per cent of the seats. How did this happen?
For this, you need to recall the discussion about the first-past- the-post method in your textbook, Indian Constitution at Work last year.
In this system of election, that has been adopted in our country, the party that gets more votes than others tends to get much more than its proportional share. That is exactly what worked in favour of the Congress. If we add up the votes of all the non-Congress candidates it was more than the votes of the
Congress. But the non-Congress votes were divided between different rival parties and candidates. So the Congress was still way ahead of the opposition and managed to win.
Rajkumari Amrit Kaur (1889-1964): A Gandhian and Freedom fighter;
belonged to the royal family of Kapurthala;
inherited Christian religion from her mother;
member of Constituent
Assembly; Minister for
Health in independent
India’s first ministry;
continued as Health
Minister till 1957.
Credit: The Hindu
Reprint 2026-27
Era of One-party Dominance 33
Communist victory in Kerala
As early as in 1957, the Congress party had the bitter taste of defeat in Kerala.
In the assembly elections held in March 1957, the Communist Party won the largest number of seats in the Kerala legislature. The party won 60 of the
126 seats and had the support of five independents. The governor invited
E. M. S. Namboodiripad, the leader of the Communist legislature party, to form the ministry. For the first time in the world, a Communist party government had come to power through democratic elections.
On losing power in the State, the Congress party began a ‘liberation struggle’ against the elected government. The CPI had come to power on the promise of carrying out radical and progressive policy measures. The Communists claimed that the agitation was led by vested interests and religious organisations.
In 1959 the Congress government at the Centre dismissed the Communist government in Kerala under Article 356 of the Constitution. This decision proved very controversial and was widely cited as one of the prominent instances of the misuse of constitutional emergency powers.
E.M.S. Namboodiripad, leading a procession of
Communist Party workers, after his ministry was dismissed from office in Trivandrum in August
Credit: Hindu
Reprint 2026-27
34 Politics in India sinc Independence
The origins of the Socialist Party can be traced back to the mass movement stage of the Indian
National Congress in the pre-independence era.
The Congress Socialist Party (CSP) was formed within the Congress in 1934 by a group of young leaders who wanted a more radical and egalitarian
Congress. In 1948, the Congress amended its constitution to prevent its members from having a dual party membership. This forced the Socialists to form a separate Socialist Party in 1948. The Party’s electoral performance caused much disappointment to its supporters. Although the Party had presence in most of the states of India, it could achieve electoral success only in a few pockets.
The socialists believed in the ideology of democratic socialism which distinguished them both from the Congress as well as from the Communists.
They criticised the Congress for favouring capitalists and landlords and for ignoring the workers and the peasants. But the socialists faced a dilemma when in 1955 the Congress declared its goal to be the socialist pattern of society. Thus it became difficult for the socialists to present themselves as an effective alternative to the Congress. Some of them, led by Rammanohar Lohia, increased their distance from and criticism of the Congress party. Some others like Asoka Mehta advocated a limited cooperation with the Congress.
The Socialist Party went through many splits and reunions leading to the formation of many socialist parties. These included the Kisan Mazdoor Praja Party, the Praja Socialist
Party and Samyukta Socialist Party. Jayaprakash Narayan,
Achyut Patwardhan, Asoka Mehta, Acharya Narendra Dev,
Rammanohar Lohia and S.M. Joshi were among the leaders of the socialist parties. Many parties in contemporary India, like the Samajwadi Party, the Rashtriya Janata Dal, Janata
Dal (United) and the Janata Dal (Secular) trace their origins to the Socialist Party.
Socialist Party (SP)
Acharya Narendra
Dev (1889-1956):
Freedom fighter and founding President of the Congress Socialist
Party; jailed several times during the freedom movement;
active in peasants’ movement; a scholar of Buddhism; after independence led the
Socialist Party and later the Praja Socialist
34 Politics in India since Independence
Reprint 2026-27
Era of One-party Dominance 35
Nature of Congress dominance
India is not the only country to have experienced the dominance of one party. If we look around the world, we find many other examples
Babasaheb Bhimrao Ramji
Ambedkar (1891-1956): Leader of the a
