In this chapter…
Thus far we have focussed in this book on the developments within the country and on domestic challenges. We now turn to the external challenges. Here too our leaders faced the challenge with an innovative response by way of the policy of non-alignment. But they also found themselves in conflict with neighbours. This led to three wars in 1962,
1965 and 1971. These wars, and the external relations in general, were shaped by and had their impact on the politics in the country.
In this chapter we study the story of this relationship between the external and the internal politics by focussing on
• the international context that shaped India’s external relations;
• the operational principles that informed the country’s foreign
• the history of India’s relations with China and Pakistan; and
• the evolution of India’s nuclear policy.
Nehru with Nkrumah from Ghana, Nasser from Egypt, Sukarno from Indonesia and
Tito from Yugoslavia at a meeting of non- aligned nations, New
York, October 1960.
These five comprised the core leadership of the
Non-Aligned Movement
Credit: NMML
Reprint 2026-27
International context
India was born as an independent nation-state in a very trying and challenging international context. The world had witnessed a devastating war and was grappling with issues of reconstruction; yet another attempt to establish an international body was underway;
many new countries were emerging as a result of the collapse of colonialism; and most new nations were trying to come to terms with the twin challenges of welfare and democracy. Free India’s foreign policy reflected all these concerns in the period immediately after
Independence. Apart from these factors at the global level, India had its own share of concerns. The British government left behind the legacy of many international disputes; partition created its own pressures, and the task of poverty alleviation was already waiting for fulfilment. This was the overall context in which India started participating in the world affairs as an independent nation-state.
As a nation born in the backdrop of the world war, India decided to conduct its foreign relations with an aim to respect the sovereignty of all other nations and to achieve security through the maintenance of peace. This aim finds an echo in the Directive principles of State
Just as both internal and external factors guide the behaviour of an individual or a family, both domestic and international environment influence the foreign policy of a nation. The developing countries lack the required resources to effectively advocate their concerns in the international system. So they pursue more modest goals than the advanced states. They focus more on peace and development in their own neighbourhood. Moreover, their economic and security dependence on the more powerful states occasionally influences their foreign policy. In the period immediately after the Second world war, many developing nations chose to support the foreign policy preferences of the powerful countries who were giving them aid or credits. This resulted in the division of countries of the world into two clear camps. One was under the influence of the United States and its western allies and the other was under the influence of the then Soviet Union. There was also the experiment called Non- Aligned
Movement in which India had played an important role. However, the end of the Cold war changed the context of international relations entirely. But when India achieved its freedom and started framing
What does independence consist of?
It consists fundamentally and basically of foreign relations. That is the test of independence. All else is local autonomy. Once foreign relations go out of your hands into the charge of somebody else, to that extent and in that measure you are not independent.
Jawaharlal Nehru during a debate in the
Constituent Assembly in
March 1949.
4chapter
IndIa’s external relatIons
Reprint 2026-27
56 Politics in India since Independence its foreign policy, the Cold war was just beginning and the world was getting divided into these two camps. Did India belong to any of these two camps in global politics of the fifties and the sixties? was it successful in conducting its foreign policy peacefully and avoiding international conflicts?
The Policy of non-alignment
The Indian national movement was not an isolated process. It was a part of the worldwide struggle against colonialism and imperialism.
It influenced the liberation movements of many Asian and African countries. prior to India’s Independence, there were contacts between the nationalist leaders of India and those of other colonies, united as they were in their common struggle against colonialism and imperialism. The creation of the Indian National Army (INA) by Netaji
Subhash Chandra Bose during the Second world war was the clearest manifestation of the linkages established between India and overseas
Indians during the freedom struggle.
The foreign policy of a nation reflects the interplay of domestic and external factors. Therefore, the noble ideals that inspired India’s struggle for freedom influenced the making of its foreign policy. But
India’s attainment of independence coincided with the beginning of the Cold war era, a period which was marked by the political, economic, and military confrontation at the global level between the two blocs led by the superpowers, the US and the USSR. The same period also witnessed developments like the establishment of the
UN, the creation of nuclear weapons, the emergence of Communist
The Constitutional principles
Article 51 of the Indian Constitution lays down some Directive Principles of State Policy on
‘Promotion of international peace and security’.
“The State shall endeavour to – (a) Promote international peace and security (b) Maintain just and honourable relations between nations (c) Foster respect for international law and treaty obligations in the dealings of organised people with one another; and (d) Encourage settlement of international disputes by arbitration.”
How well did the Indian state live up to these principles in the first two decades after
Independence? You may come back to this question after reading the chapter.
It’s the fourth chapter and it’s Nehru once again! was he a superman or what?
Or has his role been glorified?
Reprint 2026-27
India’s external relations 57
China, and the beginning of decolonisation. So India’s leadership had to pursue its national interests within the prevailing international context.
Nehru’s role
The first prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru played a crucial role in setting the national agenda. He was his own foreign minister. Thus both as the prime Minister and the Foreign Minister, he exercised profound influence in the formulation and implementation of India’s foreign policy from 1946 to 1964. The three major objectives of
Nehru’s foreign policy were to preserve the hard-earned sovereignty, protect territorial integrity, and promote rapid economic development.
Nehru wished to achieve these objectives through the strategy of non- alignment. There were, of course, parties and groups in the country that believed that India should be more friendly with the bloc led by the US because that bloc claimed to be pro-democracy. Among those who thought on these lines were leaders like Dr Ambedkar. Some political parties, which were opposed to communism, also wanted
India to follow a pro-US foreign policy. These included the Bharatiya
Jan Sangh and later the Swatantra party. But Nehru possessed considerable leeway in formulating foreign policy.
Distance from two camps
The foreign policy of independent India vigorously pursued the dream of a peaceful world by advocating the policy of non-alignment, by reducing Cold war tensions and by contributing human resources to the UN peacekeeping operations. You might ask why India did not join either of the two camps during the Cold war era. India wanted to keep away from the military alliances led by US and Soviet Union against each other. During the Cold war, the US-led North Atlantic
Treaty Organisation (NATO) and the Soviet-led warsaw pact came into existence. India advocated non-alignment as the ideal foreign policy approach. This was a difficult balancing act and sometimes the balance did not appear perfect. In 1956 when Britain attacked Egypt over the Suez Canal issue, India led the world protest against this neo-colonial invasion. But in the same year when the USSR invaded
Hungary, India did not join its public condemnation. Despite such a situation, by and large India did take an independent stand on various international issues and could get aid and assistance from members of both the blocs.
while India was trying to convince the other developing countries about the policy of non-alignment, pakistan joined the US-led military alliances. The US was not happy about India’s independent initiatives and the policy of non-alignment. Therefore, there was a considerable
Our general policy is to avoid entanglement in power politics and not to join any group of powers as against any other group.
The two leading groups today are the Russian bloc and the Anglo-
American bloc. We must be friendly to both and yet not join either. Both
America and Russia are extraordinarily suspicious of each other as well as of other countries. This makes our path difficult and we may well be suspected by each of leaning towards the other. This cannot be
Jawaharlal Nehru
Letter to K .p. S.
Menon, January
Reprint 2026-27
58 Politics in India since Independence unease in Indo-US relations during the 1950s. The US also resented
India’s growing partnership with the Soviet Union.
You have studied in the last chapter, the strategy of planned economic development adopted by India. This policy emphasised import-substitution. The emphasis on developing a resource base also meant that export oriented growth was limited. This development strategy limited India’s economic interaction with the outside world.
Afro-Asian unity
Yet, given its size, location and power potential, Nehru envisaged a major role for India in world affairs and especially in Asian affairs.
His era was marked by the establishment of contacts between India and other newly independent states in Asia and Africa. Throughout the 1940s and 1950s, Nehru had been an ardent advocate of Asian unity. Under his leadership, India convened the Asian Relations
Conference in March 1947, five months ahead of attaining its independence. India made earnest efforts for the early realisation of freedom of Indonesia from the Dutch colonial regime by convening an international conference in 1949 to support its freedom struggle.
India was a staunch supporter of the decolonisation process and firmly opposed racism, especially apartheid in South Africa. The Afro-
Asian conference held in the Indonesian city of Bandung in 1955, commonly known as the Bandung Conference, marked the zenith of
India’s engagement with the newly independent Asian and African nations. The Bandung Conference later led to the establishment of the NAM. The First Summit of the NAM was held in Belgrade in
September 1961. Nehru was a co-founder of the NAM.
Peace and conflict with China
Unlike its relationship with pakistan, free India began its relationship with China on a very friendly note. After the Chinese revolution in
1949, India was one of the first countries to recognise the communist government. Nehru felt strongly for this neighbour that was coming out of the shadow of western domination and helped the new government in international fora. Some of his colleagues, like Vallabhbhai patel, were worried about a possible Chinese aggression in future. But Nehru thought it was ‘exceedingly unlikely’ that India will face an attack from China. For a very long time, the Chinese border was guarded by para-military forces, not the army.
The joint enunciation of panchsheel, the Five principles of peaceful
Coexistence, by the Indian prime Minister Nehru and the Chinese premier Zhou Enlai on 29 April 1954 was a step in the direction of stronger relationship between the two countries. Indian and Chinese leaders visited each other’s country and were greeted by large and friendly crowds.
Did we have more recognition and power in the world when we were younger, poorer and more vulnerable than now? Isn’t that strange?
a country without material, men or money
– the three means of power
– is now fast coming to be recognised as the biggest moral power in the civilised world …her word listened to with respect in the councils of the great.
C. Rajagopalachari
Letter to Edwina
Mountbatten, 1950.
Reprint 2026-27
India’s external relations 59
The plateau of the central Asian region called Tibet is one of the major issues that historically caused tension between India and China. From time to time in history, China had claimed administrative control over Tibet. And from time to time, Tibet was independent too. In 1950, China took over control of Tibet. Large sections of the Tibetan population opposed this takeover. India tried to persuade
China to recognise Tibet’s claims for independence.
When the Panchsheel agreement was signed between India and China in 1954, through one of its clauses about respecting each other’s territorial integrity and sovereignty, India conceded China’s claim over Tibet. The Tibetan spiritual leader Dalai Lama accompanied the Chinese Premier Zhou
Enlai during the official Chinese visit to India in 1956. He informed Nehru about the worsening situation in Tibet. But China had already assured India that Tibet will be given greater autonomy than enjoyed by any other region of China. In 1958, there was armed uprising in Tibet against China’s occupation.
This was suppressed by the Chinese forces. Sensing that the situation had become worse, in 1959, the
Dalai Lama crossed over into the Indian border and sought asylum which was granted. The Chinese government strongly protested against this. Over the last half century, a large number of Tibetans have also sought refuge in India and many other countries of the world. In India, particularly in Delhi, there are large settlements of Tibetan refugees. Dharmashala in Himachal Pradesh is perhaps the largest refuge settlement of Tibetans in India. The Dalai Lama has also made Dharmashala his home in India.
In the 1950s and 1960s many political leaders and parties in India including the Socialist Party and the
Jan Sangh supported the cause of Tibet’s independence.
China has created the Tibet autonomous region, which is an integral part of China. Tibetans oppose the
Chinese claim that Tibet is part of Chinese territory. They also oppose the policy of bringing into Tibet more and more Chinese settlers. Tibetans dispute China’s claim that autonomy is granted to the region.
They think that China wants to undermine the traditional religion and culture of Tibet.
Credit: Homai Vyarawalla
Dalai Lama enters India with his followers.
India’s external relations 59
Reprint 2026-27
60 Politics in India since Independence
Border disputes with
China erupted in 1960. Talks between Nehru and Mao Tsetung proved futile.
Note: This illustration is not a map drawn to scale and should not be taken to be an authentic depiction of India’s external boundaries.
Reprint 2026-27
India’s external relations 61
V.K. Krishna (1897-1974):
Diplomat and minister; active in the Labour
Party in UK between 1934-
1947; Indian High
Commissioner in UK and later head of India’s delegation to UN; Rajya
Sabha MP and later Lok Sabha MP;
member of the Union Cabinet from
1956; Defence Minsiter since 1957;
considered very close to Nehru;
resigned after the India-China war in
Credit: R. K. Laxman
China roller evidence construction.
Reprint 2026-27
62 Politics in India since Independence it from my grandfather. Nehru
Ji cried in public when
Lata Mangeshkar sang
“Ai mere watan ke logo…” after the 1962 war.
The Chinese invasion, 1962
Two developments strained this relationship. China annexed Tibet in
1950 and thus removed a historical buffer between the two countries.
Initially, the government of India did not oppose this openly. But as more information came in about the suppression of Tibetan culture, the Indian government grew uneasy. The Tibetan spiritual leader, the
Dalai Lama, sought and obtained political asylum in India in 1959.
China alleged that the government of India was allowing anti-China activities to take place from within India.
A little earlier, a boundary dispute had surfaced between India and China. India claimed that the boundary was a matter settled in colonial time, but China said that any colonial decision did not apply.
The main dispute was about the western and the eastern end of the long border. China claimed two areas within the Indian territory:
Aksai-chin area in the Ladakh region of Jammu and Kashmir and much of the state of Arunachal Pradesh in what was then called
NEFA (North Eastern Frontier Agency). Between 1957 and 1959, the Chinese occupied the Aksai-chin area and built a strategic road there. Despite a very long correspondence and discussion among top leaders, these differences could not be resolved. Several small border skirmishes between the armies of the two countries took place.
Around this time, while the entire world’s attention was on the
Cuban Missile crisis involving the two superpowers, China launched a swift and massive invasion in October 1962 on both the disputed regions. The first attack lasted one week and Chinese forces captured some key areas in Arunachal Pradesh. The second wave of attack came next month. While the Indian forces could block the Chinese advances on the western front in Ladakh, in the east the Chinese managed to advance nearly to the entry point of Assam plains.
Finally, China declared a unilateral ceasefire and its troops withdrew to where they were before the invasion began.
The China war dented India’s image at home and abroad. India had t
