In this chapter…
In Chapter Two we read about the emergence of the Congress system. This system was first challenged during the 1960s. As political competition became more intense, the Congress found it difficult to retain its dominance. It faced challenges from the opposition that was more powerful and less divided than before. The Congress also faced challenges from within, as the party could no longer accommodate all kinds of differences. In this chapter we pick the story from where we left it in Chapter Two, in order to
• understand how the political transition took place after Nehru;
• describe how the opposition unity and the Congress split posed a challenge to Congress dominance;
• explain how a new Congress led by Indira Gandhi overcame these challenges; and
• analyse how new policies and ideologies facilitated the restoration of the Congress system.
Originally the election symbol of the Congress was a pair of bullocks.
This famous cartoon depicts the changes within the Congress leading to a head- on confrontation in the 22nd year after
Independence.
Credit: R. K. Laxman in the Times of India
Reprint 2026-27
Challenge of Political Succession
Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru passed away in May 1964. He had been unwell for more than a year. This had generated a lot of speculation about the usual question of succession: after Nehru, who? But in a newly independent country like India, this situation gave rise to a more serious question: after Nehru, what?
The second question arose from the serious doubts that many outsiders had about whether India’s democratic experiment will survive after Nehru. It was feared that like so many other newly independent countries, India too would not be able to manage a democratic succession. A failure to do so, it was feared, could lead to a political role for the army. Besides, there were doubts if the new leadership would be able to handle the multiple crises that awaited a solution. The 1960s were labelled as the ‘dangerous decade’ when or Canada have similar problems, no one talks about failure or disintegration. Why are we under this constant suspicion?
5chapter challenges to and restoration of the congress system
Reprint 2026-27
74 Politics in India since Independence unresolved problems like poverty, inequality, communal and regional divisions etc. could lead to a failure of the democratic project or even the disintegration of the country.
From Nehru to Shastri
The ease with which the succession after Nehru took place proved all the critics wrong. When Nehru passed away, K. Kamraj, the president of the Congress party consulted party leaders and Congress members of Parliament and found that there was a consensus in favour of Lal
Bahadur Shastri. He was unanimously chosen as the leader of the
Congress parliamentary party and thus became the country’s next
Prime Minister. Shastri was a non-controversial leader from Uttar
Pradesh who had been a Minister in Nehru’s cabinet for many years.
Nehru had come to depend a lot on him in his last year. He was known for his simplicity and his commitment to principles. Earlier he had resigned from the position of Railway Minister accepting moral responsibility for a major railway accident.
Shastri was the country’s Prime Minister from 1964 to 1966.
During Shastri’s brief Prime Ministership, the country faced two major challenges. While India was still recovering from the economic implications of the war with China, failed monsoons, drought and serious food crisis presented a grave challenge. As discussed in the previous chapter, the country also faced a war with Pakistan in
1965. Shastri’s famous slogan ‘Jai Jawan Jai Kisan’, symbolised the country’s resolve to face both these challenges.
Shastri’s Prime Ministership came to an abrupt end on 11 January
1966, when he suddenly expired in Tashkent, then in USSR and currently the capital of Uzbekistan. He was there to discuss and sign an agreement with Muhammad Ayub Khan, the then President of
Pakistan, to end the war.
From Shastri to Indira Gandhi
Thus the Congress faced the challenge of political succession for the second time in two years. This time there was an intense competition between Morarji Desai and Indira Gandhi. Morarji Desai had earlier served as Chief Minister of Bombay state (today’s Maharashtra and
Gujarat) and also as a Minister at the centre. Indira Gandhi, the daughter of Jawaharlal Nehru, had been Congress President in the past and had also been Union Minister for Information in the Shastri cabinet. This time the senior leaders in the party decided to back
Indira Gandhi, but the decision was not unanimous. The contest was resolved through a secret ballot among Congress MPs. Indira
Gandhi defeated Morarji Desai by securing the support of more than two-thirds of the party’s MPs. A peaceful transition of power, despite intense competition for leadership, was seen as a sign of maturity of
India’s democracy.
…new Prime
Minister of India, in spite of all forebodings, had been named with more dispatch, and much more dignity, than was the new Prime
Minister of Britain.
Editorial in The Guardian,
London, 3 June 1964, comparing the political succession after Nehru with the succession drama after Harold Macmillan in
Britain.
Lal Bahadur (1904-1966):
Prime Minister of
India; participated in the freedom movement since
1930; minister in UP cabinet;
General Secretary of Congress;
Minister in Union
Cabinet from
1951 to 1956 when he resigned taking responsibility for the railway accident and later from 1957 to 1964; coined the famous slogan ‘Jai
Jawan-Jai Kisan’.
Reprint 2026-27
Challenges to and Restoration of the Congress System 75
It took some time before the new Prime Minister could settle down.
While Indira Gandhi had been politically active for very long, she had served as a minister under Lal Bahadur Shastri only for a short period.
The senior Congress leaders may have supported Indira Gandhi in the belief that her administrative and political inexperience would compel her to be dependent on them for support and guidance. Within a year of becoming Prime Minister, Indira Gandhi had to lead the party in a Lok Sabha election. Around this time, the economic situation in the country had further deteriorated, adding to her problems. Faced with these difficulties, she set out to gain control over the party and to demonstrate her leadership skills.
Indira Gandhi (1917-1984): Prime Minister of India from 1966 to 1977 and 1980 to 1984; daughter of Jawaharlal Nehru; participated in the freedom struggle as a young Congress worker; Congress President in 1959; minister in Shastri’s cabinet from 1964-66; led the Congress party to victory in 1967, 1971 and 1980 general elections; credited with the slogan ‘Garibi Hatao’, victory in 1971 war and for policy initiatives like abolition of Privy Purse, nationalisation of banks, nuclear test and environmental protection; assassinated on 31 October 1984.
Credit: R. K. Laxman in The Times of India, 18 January 1966
Reprint 2026-27
76 Politics in India since Independence
Fourth General Elections, 1967
The year 1967 is considered a landmark year in India’s political and electoral history. In Chapter Two you read about how the Congress party was the dominant political force throughout the country from
1952 onwards. This trend was to undergo significant changes with the 1967 elections.
Context of the elections
In the years leading up to the fourth general elections, the country witnessed major changes. Two Prime Ministers had died in quick succession, and the new Prime Minister, who was being seen as a political novice, had been in office for less than a year. You will recall from the discussion in Chapter Three and in the previous section of this chapter that the period was fraught with grave economic crisis resulting from successive failure of monsoons, widespread drought,
It must have been difficult for her – one woman in a world dominated by men.
Why don’t we have more women in positions like that?
Credit: Raghu Rai
Reprint 2026-27
Challenges to and Restoration of the Congress System 77 decline in agricultural production, serious food shortage, depletion of foreign exchange reserves, drop in industrial production and exports, combined with a sharp rise in military expenditure and diversion of resources from planning and economic development. One of the first decisions of the Indira Gandhi government was to devaluate the
Indian rupee, under what was seen to be pressure from the US. Earlier one
US dollar could be purchased for less than Rs. 5; after devaluation it cost more than Rs. 7.
The economic situation triggered off price rise. People started protesting against the increase in prices of essential commodities, food scarcity, growing unemployment and the overall economic condition in the country. Bandhs and hartals were called frequently across the country.
The government saw the protests as a law and order problem and not as expressions of people’s problems. This further increased public bitterness and reinforced popular unrest.
The communist and socialist parties launched struggles for greater equality. You will read in the next chapter about how a group of communists who separated from the
Communist Party of India (Marxist)
to form the Communist Party of India (Marxist-Leninist) led armed agrarian struggles and organised peasant agitations. This period also witnessed some of the worst Hindu-Muslim riots since Independence.
Non-Congressism
This situation could not have remained isolated from party politics in the country. Opposition parties were in the forefront of organising public protests and pressurising the
Election in a Rajasthan Village
This is a story about 1967 assembly elections. In the Chomu constituency, the main parties in the fray were Congress and the Swatantra party.
But village Devisar had its own local political dynamics and it got mixed up with the competition between the two parties.
Sher Singh, traditionally dominated village politics, but gradually his nephew,
Bhim Singh was emerging as the more popular leader and rival. Though both were Rajputs, Bhim
Singh cultivated the support of many non-Rajputs in the village by attending to their requirements after becoming the panchayat Pradhan. So, he struck a new equation—the alliance of Rajputs and non-Rajputs.
He proved to be more adept in building alliances across the village by supporting candidates in other villages for the posts of village Pradhan. In fact, he took an initiative and took a delegation to the State Chief
Minister and Congress leader Mohan Lal Sukhadia for pressing the name of one of his friends from a nearby village as Congress candidate in the Assembly election. When Sukhadia convinced him of some other name, Bhim Singh, in turn, convinced many others that they should work for the party candidate. Bhim
Singh knew that if the party candidate won from this constituency, that candidate would become a minister and thus, he would have direct contacts with a minister for the first time!
Sher Singh had no option but to work for the Swatantra candidate, who was a jagirdar. He kept telling people that the jagirdar would help build the village school and use his resources for the development of the locality.
At least in Devisar village, the Assembly election had turned into a factional fight between uncle and nephew.
Based on Anand Chakravarti, ‘A Village in Chomu
Assembly Constituency in Rajasthan.’
Reprint 2026-27
78 Politics in India since Independence government. Parties opposed to the Congress realised that the division of their votes kept the
Congress in power. Thus parties that were entirely different and disparate in their programmes and ideology got together to form anti-Congress fronts in some states and entered into electoral adjustments of sharing seats in others. They felt that the inexperience of Indira Gandhi and the internal factionalism within the Congress provided them an opportunity to topple the Congress. The socialist leader Ram Manohar Lohia gave this strategy the name of ‘non-Congressism’. He also produced a theoretical argument in its defence: Congress rule was undemocratic and opposed to the interests of ordinary poor people;
therefore, the coming together of the non-Congress parties was necessary for reclaiming democracy for the people.
Electoral verdict
It was in this context of heightened popular discontent and the polarisation of political forces that the fourth general elections to the Lok Sabha and State Assemblies were held in February 1967.
The Congress was facing the electorate for the first time without Nehru.
The results jolted the Congress at both the national and state levels. Many contemporary political observers described the election results as a ‘political earthquake’.The Congress did manage to get a majority in the Lok Sabha, but with its lowest tally of seats and share of votes since 1952.
Half the ministers in Indira Gandhi’s cabinet were defeated. The political stalwarts who lost in their constituencies included Kamaraj in Tamil Nadu,
S.K. Patil in Maharashtra, Atulya Ghosh in West
Bengal and K. B. Sahay in Bihar.
...in India, as present trends continue… maintenance of an ordered structure of society is going to slip out of reach of an ordered structure of civil government and the army will be only alternative source of authority and order. …the great experiment of developing
India within a democratic framework has failed.
Neville Maxwell
‘India’s Disintegrating
Democracy’ an article published in the London
Times, 1967.
“ C. Natarajan Annadurai (1909-1969): Chief Minister of Madras (Tamil Nadu)
from 1967; a journalist, popular writer and orator;
initially associated with the
Justice Party in Madras province; later joined Dravid
Kazagham (1934); formed
DMK as a political party in
1949; a proponent of Dravid culture, he was opposed to imposition of Hindi and led the anti-Hindi agitations;
supporter of greater autonomy to States.
Ram Manohar
Lohia (1910-1967):
Socialist leader and thinker; freedom fighter and among the founders of the
Congress Socialist
Party; after the split in the parent party, the leader of the Socialist Party and later the Samyukta Socialist
Party; Member, Lok Sabha, 1963-
67; founder editor of Mankind and
Jan, known for original contribution to a non-European socialist theory;
as political leader, best known for sharp attacks on Nehru, strategy of non-Congressism, advocacy of reservation for backward castes and opposition to English.
Reprint 2026-27
Challenges to and Restoration of the Congress System 79
Is non-Congressism relevant today? Can it be applied against Left Front in today’s West Bengal?
Note: This illustration is not a map drawn to scale and should not be taken to be an authentic depiction of
India’s external boundaries.
Reprint 2026-27
80 Politics in India since Independence
The dramatic nature of the political change would be more apparent to you at the State level. The Congress lost majority in as many as seven States. In two other States defections prevented it from forming a government. These nine States where the Congress lost power were spread across the country – Punjab, Haryana, Uttar
Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, Orissa, Madras and
Kerala. In Madras State (now called Tamil Nadu), a regional party — the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) – came to power by securing a clear majority. The DMK won power after having led a massive anti-Hindi agitation by students against the centre on the issue of imposition of Hindi as the official language. This was the first time any non-Congress party had secured a majority of its own in any State. In the other eight States, coalition governments consisting of different non-Congress parties were formed. A popular saying was that one could take a train from Delhi to Howrah and not pass through a single Congress ruled State. It was a strange feeling for those who were used to seeing the Congress in power. So, was the domination of the Congress over?
Coalitions
The elections of 1967 brought into picture the phenomenon of coalitions. Since no single party had got majority, various non-
Congress parties came together to form joint legislative parties (called
Samyukt Vidhayak Dal in Hindi) that supported non-Congress governments. That is why these governments came to be described as SVD governments. In most of these cases the coalition partners were ideologically incongruent. The SVD government in Bihar, for instance, included the two socialist parties – SSP and the PSP – along with the CPI on the left and Jana Sangh on the right. In Punjab it was called the ‘Popular United Front’ and comprised the two rival
Akali parties at that time – Sant group and the Master group – with both the communist parties – the CPI and the CPI(M), the SSP, the
Republican Party and the Bharatiya Jana Sangh.
A cartoonist’s reading of Charan Singh’s attempt to build a United Front of non-communist parties in 1974
Credit: Kutty so unusual in hung assemblies and coalition governments? We see them all the time.
Reprint 2026-27
Challenges to and Restoration of the Congress System 81
Defection
Another important feature of the politics after the 1967 election was the role played by defections in the making and unmaking of governments in the States. Defection means an elected representative leaves the party on whose symbol he/she was elected and joins another party.
After the 1967 general election, the breakaway Congress legislators played an important role in installing non-Congress governments in three States - Haryana, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh. The constant realignments and shifting political loyalties in this period gave rise to the expression ‘Aya Ram, Gaya Ram’.
The story of ‘Aya Ram, Gaya Ram’
The expression ‘aya ram, gaya ram’ became popular in the political vocabulary in India to describe the practice of frequent floor- crossing by legislators. Literally translated the terms meant, Ram came and Ram went.
