In this chapter…
We have seen in the last chapter that the Congress recovered after
1971, but was not the same kind of party. The difference became clear in a series of events between 1973 and 1975 that brought new challenges to India’s democratic politics and the institutional balance sought by the Constitution. These developments led to the imposition of
‘emergency’ in June 1975. Normally, we would associate ‘emergency’ with war and aggression or with natural disaster. But this ‘emergency’ was imposed because of the perceived threat of internal disturbance.
The Emergency ended as dramatically as it had begun, resulting in a defeat of the Congress in the Lok Sabha elections of 1977.
In this chapter we focus on this crucial phase in the history of democracy in India and ask some questions that have remained controversial after all these years.
• Why was Emergency imposed? Was it necessary?
• What did the imposition of Emergency mean in practice?
• What were the consequences of Emergency on party politics?
• What are the lessons of Emergency for Indian democracy?
The editorial page of
‘Nai Dunia’ of 27 June
1975 was like any other day, except that the space for editorial was left blank. The editorial was “censored” using emergency powers.
Many other newspapers also carried such blank spaces–sometimes to protest against emergency. Later, leaving blank space was also
Reprint 2026-27
Background to Emergency
We have already studied the changes that were taking place in Indian politics since 1967. Indira Gandhi had emerged as a towering leader with tremendous popularity. This was also the period when party competition became bitter and polarised. This period also witnessed tensions in the relationship between the government and the judiciary.
The Supreme Court found many initiatives of the government to be violative of the Constitution. The Congress party took the position that this stand of the Court was against principles of democracy and parliamentary supremacy. The Congress also alleged that the
Court was a conservative institution and it was becoming an obstacle in the way of implementing pro-poor welfare programmes. The parties opposed to the Congress felt that politics was becoming too personalised and that governmental authority was being converted into personal authority. The split in the Congress had sharpened the divisions between Indira Gandhi and her opponents.
Economic context
In the elections of 1971, Congress had given the slogan of garibi hatao (remove poverty). However, the social and economic condition in the country did not improve much after 1971-72. The Bangladesh crisis had put a heavy strain on India’s economy. About eight million people crossed over the East Pakistan border into India. This was followed by war with Pakistan. After the war the U.S government stopped all aid to India. In the international market, oil prices increased manifold during this period. This led to an all-round increase in prices of commodities. Prices increased by 23 per cent in 1973 and 30 per cent in 1974.
Such a high level of inflation caused much hardship to the people.
Industrial growth was low and unemployment was very high, particularly in the rural areas. In order to reduce expenditure the government froze the salaries of its employees. This caused further dissatisfaction among government employees. Monsoons failed in 1972-
1973. This resulted in a sharp decline in agricultural productivity. Food grain output declined by 8 per cent.
Credit: Abu
6chapter the crisis of
Democratic orDer
Reprint 2026-27
94 Politics in India since Independence
There was a general atmosphere of dissatisfaction with the prevailing economic situation all over the country. In such a context non-
Congress opposition parties were able to organise popular protests effectively. Instances of students’ unrests that had persisted from the late 1960s became more pronounced in this period. There was also an increase in the activities of Marxist groups who did not believe in parliamentary politics. These groups had taken to arms and insurgent techniques for the overthrow of the capitalist order and the established political system. Known as the Marxist-Leninist (now Maoist) groups or Naxalites, they were particularly strong in
West Bengal, where the State government took stringent measures to suppress them.
Gujarat and Bihar movements
Students’ protests in Gujarat and Bihar, both of which were Congress ruled States, had far reaching impact on the politics of the two States and national politics. In January 1974 students in Gujarat started an agitation against rising prices of food grains, cooking oil and other essential commodities, and against corruption in high places.
The students’ protest was joined by major opposition parties and became widespread leading to the imposition of President’s rule in the state. The opposition parties demanded fresh elections to the state legislature. Morarji Desai, a prominent leader of Congress (O), who was the main rival of Indira Gandhi when he was in the Congress, announced that he would go on an indefinite fast if fresh elections were not held in the State. Under intense pressure from students, supported by the opposition political parties, assembly elections were held in Gujarat in June 1975. The Congress was defeated in this election.
In March 1974 students came together in Bihar to protest against rising prices, food scarcity, unemployment and corruption. After a point they invited Jayaprakash Narayan (JP), who had given up active politics and was involved in social work, to lead the student movement. He accepted it on the condition that the movement will remain non-violent and will not limit itself to Bihar. Thus the students’ movement assumed a political character and had national appeal.
People from all walks of life now entered the movement. Jayaprakash
Narayan demanded the dismissal of the Congress government in Bihar and gave a call for total revolution in the social, economic and political spheres in order to establish what he considered to be true democracy. A series of bandhs, gehraos, and strikes
Sampoorna Kranti ab nara hai, bhavi itihas hamara hai [With Total
Revolution as our motto, the future belongs to us]
A slogan of the Bihar movement, 1974
Indira is India,
India is Indira
A slogan given by
D. K. Barooah, President of the
Congress, 1974 people must have had a tough time. What happened to the promise of garibi hatao?
Reprint 2026-27
The Crisis of Democratic Order 95
Credit: R. K. Laxman in The Times of India, 16 April 1974 were organised in protest against the
Bihar government. The government, however, refused to resign.
The movement was beginning to influence national politics. Jayaprakash
Narayan wanted to spread the Bihar movement to other parts of the country. Alongside the agitation led by
Jayaprakash Narayan, the employees of the Railways gave a call for a nationwide strike. This threatened to paralyse the country. In 1975, JP led a peoples’ march to the Parliament. This was one of the largest political rallies ever held in the capital. He was now supported by the non-Congress opposition parties like the Bharatiya Jana Sangh, the
Congress (O), the Bharatiya Lok Dal, the Socialist Party and others. These
Loknayak
Jayaprakash
Narayan (JP)
(1902-1979):
A marxist in his youth; founder general secretary of the Congress
Socialist Party and the Socialist Party; a hero of the 1942 Quit
India movement; declined to join Nehru’s cabinet;
after 1955 quit active politics; became a Gandhian and was involved in the Bhoodan movement, negotiations with the Naga rebels, peace initiative in Kashmir and ensured the surrender of decoits in
Chambal; leader of Bihar movement, he became the symbol of opposition to Emergency and was the moving force behind the formation of Janata Party.
Reprint 2026-27
96 Politics in India since Independence parties were projecting JP as an alternative to Indira Gandhi. However, there were many criticisms about his ideas and about the politics of mass agitations that he was employing. Both the Gujarat and Bihar agitations were seen as anti-Congress and rather than opposing the
State governments, they were seen as protests against the leadership of Indira Gandhi. She believed that the movement was motivated by personal opposition to her.
Do ‘committed judiciary’ and
‘committed bureaucracy’ mean that the judges and government officials should be loyal to the ruling party?
Railway Strike of 1974
What would happen when the railways stop running? Not for one or two days, but for more than a week? Of course, many people would be inconvenienced; but more than that, the economy of the country would come to a halt because goods are transported from one part to another by trains.
Do you know that such a thing actually happened in 1974? The National
Coordination Committee for Railwaymen’s Struggle led by George
Fernandes gave a call for nationwide strike by all employees of the
Railways for pressing their demands related to bonus and service conditions. The government was opposed to these demands. So, the employees of India’s largest public sector undertaking went on a strike in
May 1974. The strike by the Railway employees added to the atmosphere of labour unrest. It also raised issues like rights of the workers and whether employees of essential services should adopt measures like strikes.
The government declared the strike illegal. As the government refused to concede the demands of the striking workers, arrested many of their leaders and deployed the territorial army to protect railway tracks, the strike had to be called off after twenty days without any settlement.
Conflict with Judiciary
This was also the period when the government and the ruling party had many differences with the judiciary. Do you remember the discussion about the long drawn conflict between the Parliament and the judiciary? You have studied this last year. Three constitutional issues had emerged. Can the Parliament abridge Fundamental Rights?
The Supreme Court said it cannot. Secondly, can the Parliament curtail the right to property by making an amendment? Again, the
Court said that Parliament cannot amend the Constitution in such a manner that rights are curtailed. Thirdly, the Parliament amended the Constitution saying that it can abridge Fundamental Rights for giving effect to Directive Principles. But the Supreme Court rejected this provision also. This led to a crisis as far as the relations between the government and the judiciary were concerned. You may remember
Reprint 2026-27
The Crisis of Democratic Order 97 that this crisis culminated in the famous Kesavananda Bharati Case. In this case, the Court gave a decision that there are some basic features of the Constitution and the Parliament cannot amend these features.
Two developments further added to the tension between the judiciary and the executive. Immediately after the Supreme Court’s decision in 1973 in the Keshavananda Bharati case, a vacancy arose for the post of the Chief Justice of India. It had been a practice to appoint the senior-most judge of the Supreme Court as the Chief
Justice. But in 1973, the government set aside the seniority of three judges and appointed Justice A. N. Ray as the Chief Justice of India. The appointment became politically controversial because all the three judges who were superseded had given rulings against the stand of the government. Thus, constitutional interpretations and political ideologies were getting mixed up rapidly. People close to the Prime Minister started talking of the need for a judiciary and the bureaucracy ‘committed’ to the vision of the executive and the legislature. The climax of the confrontation was of course the ruling of the High Court declaring Indira Gandhi’s election invalid.
Declaration of Emergency
On 12 June 1975, Justice Jagmohan Lal Sinha of the Allahabad High
Court passed a judgment declaring Indira Gandhi’s election to the
Lok Sabha invalid. This order came on an election petition filed by
Raj Narain, a socialist leader and a candidate who had contested against her in 1971. The petition, challenged the election of Indira
Gandhi on the ground that she had used the services of government servants in her election campaign. The judgment of the High Court meant that legally she was no more an MP and therefore, could not remain the Prime Minister unless she was once again elected as an
MP within six months. On June 24, the Supreme Court granted her a partial stay on the High Court order – till her appeal was decided, she could remain an MP but could not take part in the proceedings of the
Lok Sabha.
Crisis and response
The stage was now set for a big political confrontation. The opposition political parties led by Jayaprakash Narayan pressed for Indira
Gandhi’s resignation and organised a massive demonstration in
Delhi’s Ramlila grounds on 25 June 1975. Jayaprakash announced a nationwide satyagraha for her resignation and asked the army, the police and government employees not to obey “illegal and immoral orders”. This too threatened to bring the activities of the government to a standstill. The political mood of the country had turned against the Congress, more than ever before.
That is like asking the army to disobey the government! Is that democratic?
Reprint 2026-27
98 Politics in India since Independence
The response of the government was to declare a state of emergency.
On 25 June 1975, the government declared that there was a threat of internal disturbances and therefore, it invoked Article 352 of the
Constitution. Under the provision of this article the government could declare a state of emergency on grounds of external threat or a threat of internal disturbances. The government decided that a grave crisis had arisen which made the proclamation of a state of emergency necessary. Technically speaking this was within the powers of the government, for our Constitution provides for some special powers to the government once an emergency is declared.
Once an emergency is proclaimed, the federal distribution of powers remains practically suspended and all the powers are concentrated in the hands of the union government. Secondly, the government also gets the power to curtail or restrict all or any of the Fundamental
Rights during the emergency. From the wording of the provisions of the Constitution, it is clear that an Emergency is seen as an
This cartoon appeared few days before the declaration of Emergency and captures the sense of impending political crisis. The man behind the chair is D. K. Barooah, the Congress President.
Credit: R. K. Laxman in The Times of India, 26 June 1975
Reprint 2026-27
The Crisis of Democratic Order 99 99
11 December 1975
Reprint 2026-27
100 Politics in India since Independence 100
Reprint 2026-27
The Crisis of Democratic Order 101 extraordinary condition in which normal democratic politics cannot function. Therefore, special powers are granted to the government.
On the night of 25 June 1975, the Prime Minister recommended the imposition of Emergency to President Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed. He issued the proclamation immediately. After midnight, the electricity to all the major newspaper offices was disconnected. In the early morning, a large number of leaders and workers of the opposition parties were arrested. The Cabinet was informed about it at a special meeting at 6 a.m. on 26 June, after all this had taken place.
Consequences
This brought the agitation to an abrupt stop; strikes were banned;
many opposition leaders were put in jail; the political situation became very quiet though tense. Deciding to use its special powers under
Emergency provisions, the government suspended the freedom of the
Press. Newspapers were asked to get prior approval for all material to be published. This is known as press censorship. Apprehending social and communal disharmony, the government banned Rashtriya
Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) and Jamait-e-Islami. Protests and strikes and public agitations were also disallowed. Most importantly, under the provisions of Emergency, the various Fundamental Rights of citizens stood suspended, including the right of citizens to move the
Court for restoring their Fundamental Rights.
The government made extensive use of preventive detention. Under this provision, people are arrested and detained not because they have committed any offence, but on the apprehension that they may commit an offence. Using preventive detention acts, the government made large scale arrests during the Emergency. Arrested political workers could not challenge their arrest through habeas corpus petitions.
Many cases were filed in the High Courts and the Supreme Court by and on behalf of arrested persons, but the government claimed that it was not even necessary to inform the arrested persons of the reasons and grounds of their arrest. Several High Courts gave judgments that even after the declaration of Emergency the courts could entertain a writ of habeas corpus filed by a person challenging his/her detention.
In April 1976, the constitution bench of the Supreme Court over-ruled the High Courts and accepted the government’s plea. It meant that during Emergency the government could take away the citizen’s right to life and liberty. This judgment closed the doors of judiciary for the citizens and is regarded as one of the most controversial judgments of the Supreme Court.
There were many acts of dissent and resistance to the Emergency.
Many political workers who were not arrested in the first wave, went ‘underground’ and organised protests against the government.
Newspapers like the Indian Express and the Statesman protested against censorship by leaving blank spaces where news items had been censored. Magazines like the Seminar and the Mainstream even the
Supreme Court gave in! What was happening to everyone in those the President have declared
Emergency without any recommendation from the Cabinet?
Reprint 20
