In this chapter…
In the first chapter of this book we studied the process of ‘nation-building’ in the first decade after Independence. But nation-building is not something that can be accomplished once and for all times to come. In the course of time new challenges came up. Some of the old problems had never been fully resolved.
As democratic experiment unfolded, people from different regions began to express their aspirations for autonomy. Sometimes these aspirations were expressed outside the framework of the Indian union. These involved long struggles and often aggressive and armed assertions by the people.
This new challenge came to the fore in the
1980s, as the Janata experiment came to an end and there was some political stability at the centre. This decade will be remembered for some major conflicts and accords in the various regions of the country, especially in Assam, the Punjab, Mizoram and the developments in Jammu and Kashmir. In this chapter we study these cases so as to ask some general questions.
• Which factors contribute to the tensions arising out of regional aspirations?
• How has the Indian state responded to these tensions and challenges?
• What kind of difficulties are faced in balancing democratic rights and national
• What are the lessons here for achieving unity with diversity in a democracy?
Regional aspirations are usually expressed in the language of the region and addressed to the local population or the rulers. This unusual poster from
Uttarakhand movement appeals to all the
Indian citizens in seven different languages and thus underscores the compatibility of the regional aspirations with nationalist sentiments.
Reprint 2026-27
Region and the Nation
1980s may be seen as a period of rising regional aspirations for autonomy, often outside the framework of the Indian Union. These movements frequently involved armed assertions by the people, their repression by the government, and a collapse of the political and electoral processes. It is also not surprising that most of these struggles were long drawn and concluded in negotiated settlements or accords between the central government and the groups leading the movement for autonomy. The accords were reached after a process of dialogue that aimed to settle contentious issues within the constitutional framework. Yet the journey to the accord was always tumultuous and often violent.
Indian approach
In studying the Indian Constitution and the process of nation-building we have repeatedly come across one basic principle of the Indian approach to diversity – the Indian nation shall not deny the rights of different regions and linguistic groups to retain their own culture. We decided to live a united social life without losing the distinctiveness of the numerous cultures that constituted it. Indian nationalism sought to balance the principles of unity and diversity. The nation would not mean the negation of the region. In this sense the Indian approach was very different from the one adopted in many European countries where they saw cultural diversity as a threat to the nation.
India adopted a democratic approach to the question of diversity.
Democracy allows the political expressions of regional aspirations and does not look upon them as anti-national.
Besides, democratic politics allows parties and groups to address the people on the basis of their regional identity, aspiration and specific regional problems.
Thus, in the course of democratic politics, regional aspirations get strengthened. At the same time, democratic politics also means that regional issues and problems will receive adequate attention and accommodation in the policy making process.
Such an arrangement may sometimes lead to tensions and problems. Sometimes, the concern for national unity may overshadow the regional needs
Does it mean that regionalism is not as dangerous as communalism? Or may be, not dangerous at
7chapter regional aspirations
Reprint 2026-27
114 Politics in India since Independence and aspirations. At other times a concern for region alone may blind us to the larger needs of the nation. Therefore, political conflicts over issues of power of the regions, their rights and their separate existence are common to nations that want to respect diversity while trying to forge and retain unity.
Areas of tension
In the first chapter you have seen how immediately after
Independence our nation had to cope with many difficult issues like Partition, displacement, integration of Princely States, reorganisation of states and so on. Many observers, both within the country and from outside, had predicted that India as one unified country cannot last long. Soon after Independence, the issue of Jammu and Kashmir came up. It was not only a conflict between India and Pakistan. More than that, it was a question of the political aspirations of the people of Kashmir valley. Similarly, in some parts of the north-east, there was no consensus about being a part of India. First Nagaland and then
Mizoram witnessed strong movements demanding separation from India. In the south, some groups from the Dravid movement briefly toyed with the idea of a separate country.
These events were followed by mass agitations in many parts for the formation of linguistic States. Today’s Andhra Pradesh,
Karnataka, Maharashtra, and Gujarat were among the regions affected by these agitations. In some parts of southern India, particularly Tamil Nadu, there were protests against making
Hindi the official national language of the country. In the north, there were strong pro-Hindi agitations demanding that
Hindi be made the official language immediately. From the late
1950s, people speaking the Punjabi language started agitating for a separate State for themselves. This demand was finally accepted and the States of Punjab and Haryana were created in 1966. Later, the States of Chhattisgarh, Uttarakhand and
Jharkhand were created. Thus the challenge of diversity was met by redrawing the internal boundaries of the country.
Yet this did not lead to resolution of all problems and for all times. In some regions, like Kashmir and Nagaland, the challenge was so complex that it could not be resolved in the first phase of nation-building. Besides, new challenges came up in States like Punjab, Assam and Mizoram. Let us study these cases in some detail. In this process let us also go back to some of the earlier instances of difficulties of nation building.
The successes and failures in these cases are instructive not merely for a study of our past, but also for an understanding of India’s future.
Why does the challenge always come from the border
Reprint 2026-27
Regional Aspirations 115
Jammu and Kashmir
As you have studied in the previous year, Jammu and
Kashmir had a special status under Article 370 of the Indian
Constitution. However, in spite of it, Jammu and Kashmir experienced violence, cross border terrorism and political instability with internal and external ramifications.
It also resulted in the loss of many lives including that of innocent civilians, security personnel and militants.
Besides, there was also a large scale displacement of
Kashmiri Pandits from the
Kashmir valley.
Jammu and Kashmir comprises three social and political regions — Jammu,
Kashmir and Ladakh. The Jammu region is a mix of foothills and plains. It is predominantly inhabited by the Hindus. Muslims, Sikhs and people of other denominations also reside in this region. The
Kashmir region mainly comprises of the Kashmir valley. It is inhabited mostly by Kashmiri Muslims with the remaining being Hindus, Sikhs,
Buddhists and others. The Ladakh region is mainly mountainous.
It has very little population which is almost equally divided between
Buddhists and Muslims.
Roots of the Problem
Before 1947, Jammu and Kashmir (J&K) was a Princely State. Its ruler, Maharaja Hari Singh did not want to merge either with India or Pakistan but to have an independent status for his state. The
Pakistani leaders thought that Kashmir region ‘belonged’ to Pakistan, since the majority population of the State was Muslim. But this is not how the people of the state themselves saw it— they thought of themselves as Kashmiris above all. This issue of regional aspiration is known as Kashmiriyat. The popular movement in the State, led by Sheikh Abdullah of the National Conference, wanted to get rid of the Maharaja, but was against joining Pakistan. The National
Conference was a secular organisation and had a long association with the Congress. Sheikh Abdullah was a personal friend of some of the leading nationalist leaders including Nehru.
Union Territories of Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh
Source: https://pib.gov.in
Reprint 2026-27
116 Politics in India since Independence
Dravidian movement
‘Vadakku Vaazhgiradhu; Therkku Thaeikiradhu’
[The north thrives even as the south decays].
This popular slogan sums up the dominant sentiments of one of India’s most effective regional movements, the Dravidian movement, at one point of time. This was one of the first regional movements in Indian politics.
Though some sections of this movement had ambitions of creating a Dravida nation, the movement did not take to arms. It used democratic means like public debates and the electoral platform to achieve its ends. This strategy paid off as the movement acquired political power in the State and also became influential at the national level.
The Dravidian movement led to the formation of
Dravidar Kazhagam [DK] under the leadership of Tamil social reformer E.V. Ramasami
‘Periyar’. The organisation strongly opposed the Brahmins’ dominance and affirmed regional pride against the political, economic and cultural domination of the North. Initially, the Dravidian movement spoke in terms of the whole of south India; however lack of support from other States limited the movement to Tamil Nadu.
The DK split and the political legacy of the movement was transferred to Dravida
Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK).
The DMK made its entry into politics with a three pronged agitation in 1953-54.
First, it demanded the restoration of the original name of Kallakudi railway station which had been renamed Dalmiapuram, after an industrial house from the North. This demand brought out its opposition to the North Indian economic and cultural symbols. The second agitation was for pppol ol ol olititititticc ic i al al al al al al all llllllleg egac ac ac ac accyyyyyy of of of of of of of tttttttthhe he he he he he he he rrrrrrr ed ed ed ed ttoooo Dr Dr Dr D D D D D av avvvvvidd id iddaaaaa
MK MK MK K).).))
the wh whol olee of of ssou ou o th IIIInd nd ndia ia ia; ho hhhow w
Ramasami (1879-1973):
Known as
Periyar (the respected);
supporter of atheism; famous for his anti- caste struggle and rediscovery of Dravidian identity; initially a worker of the Congress party; started the self-respect movement (1925); led the anti-Brahmin movement;
worked for the Justice party and later founded Dravidar
Kazhagam; opposed to Hindi and domination of north India;
propounded the thesis that north Indians and Brahmins are Aryans.
Anti-Hindi agitation in Tamil Nadu, 1965
Credit: The Hindu
Reprint 2026-27
Regional Aspirations 117 giving Tamil cultural history greater importance in school curricula.
The third agitation was against the craft education scheme of the State government, which it alleged was linked to the Brahmanical social outlook. It also agitated against making Hindi the country’s official language. The success of the anti-Hindi agitation of 1965 added to the
DMK’s popularity.
Sustained political agitations brought the DMK to power in the Assembly elections of 1967. Since then, the Dravidian parties have dominated the politics of Tamil Nadu. Though the DMK split after the death of its leader, C. Annadurai, the influence of Dravidian parties in Tamil politics actually increased. After the split there were two parties – the
DMK and the All India Anna DMK (AIADMK) – that claimed Dravidian legacy. Both these parties have dominated politics in Tamil Nadu for the last four decades. Since 1996, one of these parties has been a part of the ruling coalition at the Centre. In the 1990s, many other parties have emerged. These include Marumalarchchi Dravida Munnetra
Kazhagam (MDMK), Pattali Makkal Katchi (PMK) and Desiya Murpokku
Dravidar Kazhagam (DMDK). All these parties have kept alive the issue of regional pride in the politics of Tamil Nadu. Initially seen as a threat to Indian nationalism, regional politics in Tamil Nadu is a good example of the compatibility of regionalism and nationalism.
Reprint 2026-27
118 Politics in India since Independence
In October 1947, Pakistan sent tribal infiltrators from its side to capture Kashmir. This forced the
Maharaja to ask for Indian military help. India extended the military support and drove back the infiltrators from Kashmir valley, but only after the Maharaja had signed an ‘Instrument of Accession’ with the
Government of India. However, as Pakistan continued to control a sizeable part of the state, the issue was taken to the United Nations Organisation, which in its resolution dated 21 April 1948 recommended a three step process to resolve the issue. Firstly, Pakistan had to withdraw its entire nationalities, who entered into Kashmir. Secondly, India needed to progressively reduce its forces so as to maintain law and order.
Thirdly, a plebiscite was to be conducted in a free and impartial manner. However, no progress could be achieved under this resolution. In the meanwhile,
Sheikh Abdullah took over as the Prime Minister of the State of J&K in March 1948 while India agreed to grant it provisional autonomy under the Article 370.
The head of the government in the State was then called Prime Minister.
Mohammad
Abdullah (1905-1982):
Leader of Jammu and Kashmir;
proponent of autonomy and secularism for
Jammu and Kashmir; led the popular struggle against princely rule; opposed to Pakistan due to its non-secular character; leader of the National Conference; Prime
Minister of J&K immediately after its accession with India in
1947; dismissed and jailed by
Government of India from 1953 to
1964 and again from 1965 to 1968;
became Chief Minister of the State after an agreement with Indira
Gandhi in 1974.
Credit: Hindustan Times
Reprint 2026-27
Regional Aspirations 119
External and internal disputes
Since then the politics of Jammu and
Kashmir remained controversial and conflict-ridden both for external and internal reasons. Externally, Pakistan has always claimed that Kashmir valley should be part of Pakistan. As we noted above,
Pakistan sponsored a tribal invasion of the State in 1947, as a consequence of which one part of the State came under
Pakistani control. However, it is the Indian territory which is under illegal occupation of Pakistan called as Pakistan occupied
Jammu and Kashmir (POJK). Ever since
1947, Kashmir has remained a major issue of conflict between India and Pakistan.
Internally, there is a dispute about the status of Kashmir within Indian union. You have studied about the special provisions under Articles 370 and 371 last year in Indian Constitution at Work.
This special status had provoked two opposite reactions. There is a section of people outside of J&K that believed that the special status of the State conferred by
Article 370 did not allow full integration of the State with India. This section felt that Article 370 be revoked and J&K be treated like any other state of India.
Another section, mostly Kashmiris, believe that the autonomy conferred by
Article 370 is not enough. They had at least three major grievances. First, the promise that Accession would be referred to the people of the State after the situation created by tribal invasion was normalised, has not been fulfilled. This generated the demand for a plebiscite.
Secondly, there was a feeling that the special federal status guaranteed by
Article 370, had been eroded in practice.
This had led to the demand for restoration of autonomy or ‘Greater State Autonomy’.
Thirdly, it was felt that democracy which is practiced in the rest of India has not been similarly institutionalised in the
State of Jammu and Kashmir.
Let’s watch a Film
Tamil film depicting the travails of Roja, a newly wed and doting wife when her husband, Rishi, is abducted by militants. Rishi is a cryptologist who is assigned duty in Kashmir to decode the enem’s messages. As love blossoms between the husband and the wife, the husband is kidnapped.
The kidnappers demand that their jailed leader, be set free in exchange of Rishi.
Roja’s world is shattered and she is seen knocking at the doors of officials and politicians. Since the film has the background of Indo-
Pakistan dispute, it made instant appeal. The film was dubbed in Hindi and many other Indian languages.
Year: 1992
Director: Maniratnam
Screenplay: Maniratnam
Cast (Hindi version): Madhu,
Arvind Swamy, Pankaj Kapoor,
Janagaraj
Reprint 2026-27
120 Politics in India since Independence
Politics since 1948
After taking over as the Prime Minister, Sheikh Abdullah initiated major land reforms and other policies which benefitted ordinary people. But there was a growing difference between him and the central government about his position on Kashmir’s status. He was dismissed in 1953 and kept in detention for a number of years.
The leadership that succeeded him did not enjoy as much popular support and was able to rule the State mainly due to the support of the Centre. There were serious allegations of malpractices and rigging in various elections.
During most of the period between 1953 and 1974, the Congress party exercised influence on the politics of the State. A truncated
National Conference (minus Sheikh Abdullah) remained in power with the active support of Congress for some time but later it merged with the Congress. Thus, the Congress gained direct control over the government in the state and brought about the changes. In the meanwhile, there were seve
