In this chapter…
In this last chapter we take a synoptic view of the last two decades of politics in India. These developments are complex, for various kinds of factors came together to produce unanticipated outcomes in this period.
The new era in politics was impossible to foresee; it is still very difficult to understand. These developments are also controversial, for these involve deep conflicts and we are still too close to the events. Yet we can ask some questions central to the political change in this period.
• What are the implications of the rise of coalition politics for our democracy?
• What is Mandalisation all about? In which ways will it change the nature of political representation?
• What is the legacy of the Ram Janmabhoomi movement?
• What does the rise of a new policy consensus do to the nature of political choices?
The chapter does not answer these questions. It simply gives you the necessary information and some tools so that you can ask and answer these questions when you are through with this book. We cannot avoid asking these questions just because they are politically sensitive, for the whole point of studying the history of politics in India since Independence is to make sense of our present.
Ups and downs of various political parties in the 1990s appeared to many, like this cartoon drawn in 1990, as a roller coaster ride.
Riding the roller coaster are Rajiv Gandhi, V.
P. Singh, L. K. Advani,
Chandrashekhar, Jyoti
Basu, N. T. Rama Rao,
Devi Lal, P. K. Mahanta and K. Karunanidhi.
Reprint 2026-27
Context of the 1990s
You have read in the last chapter that Rajiv Gandhi became the Prime
Minister after the assassination of Indira Gandhi. He led the Congress to a massive victory in the Lok Sabha elections held immediately thereafter in 1984. As the decade of the eighties came to a close, the country witnessed five developments that were to make a long-lasting impact on our politics.
F irst the most crucial development of this period was the defeat of the Congress party in the elections held in 1989. The party that had won as many as 415 seats in the Lok Sabha in 1984 was reduced to only 197 in this election. The Congress improved its performance and came back to power soon after the mid-term elections held in 1991. But the elections of 1989 marked the end of what political scientists have called the ‘Congress system’. To be sure, the Congress remained an important party and ruled the country more than any other party even in this period since 1989. But it lost the kind of centrality it earlier enjoyed in the party system.
S econd development was the rise of the ‘Mandal issue’ in national politics. This followed the decision by the new National Front government in 1990, to implement the recommendation of the Mandal Commission that jobs in central government should be reserved for the Other Backward Classes. This led to violent ‘anti-
Mandal’ protests in different parts of the country. This dispute between the supporters and opponents of OBC reservations was known as the
‘Mandal issue’ and was to play an important role in shaping politics since 1989.
I wish to find out if the Congress can still bounce back to its old glory.
Congress leader Sitaram Kesri withdrew the crutches of support from Deve
Gowda’s United Front Government.
8chapter recent Developments in inDian politics
Reprint 2026-27
138 Politics in India since Independence
Third, the economic policy followed by the various governments took a radically different turn. This is known as the initiation of the structural adjustment programme or the new economic reforms. Started by Rajiv Gandhi, these changes first became very visible in 1991 and radically changed the direction that the Indian economy had pursued since Independence. These policies have been widely criticised by various movements and organisations. But the various governments that came to power in this period have continued to follow these.
I wish to be sure if this phenomenon would have a long-term
I am not clear if this will make a difference to politics, especially if everyone has the same policy.
Manmohan Singh, the then Finance Minister, with Prime Minister Narsimha Rao, in the initial phase of the ‘New Economic Policy’.
A reaction to Mandalisation.
Credit: R. K. Laxman in the Times of India
Reprint 2026-27
Recent Developments in Indian Politics 139 ourth, the centuries old legal and political dispute over the
Ram Janmabhoomi Temple in Ayodhya started influencing the politics of India which gave birth to various political changes.
The Ram Janmabhoomi Temple Movement, becoming the central issue, transformed the direction of the discourse on secularism and democracy. These changes culminated in the construction of the Ram
Temple at Ayodhya following the decision of the constitutional bench of the Supreme Court (which was announced on November 9, 2019).
inally, the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi in May 1991 led to a change in leadership of the Congress party. He was assassinated by a Sri Lankan Tamil linked to the LTTE when he was on an election campaign tour in Tamil Nadu. In the elections of 1991,
Congress emerged as the single largest party. Following Rajiv Gandhi’s death, the party chose Narsimha Rao as the Prime Minister.
I wonder how this will affect political parties!
Message of Harmony
Leadership in Congress made many headlines.
1 May 1996 25 October 1995 20 August 2001 25 October 2004
Reprint 2026-27
140 Politics in India since Independence
Era of Coalitions
Elections in 1989 led to the defeat of the Congress party but did not result in a majority for any other party. Though the Congress was the largest party in the Lok Sabha, it did not have a clear majority and therefore, it decided to sit in the opposition. The National Front (which itself was an alliance of Janata Dal and some other regional parties)
received support from two diametrically opposite political groups: the
BJP and the Left Front. On this basis, the National Front formed a coalition government, but the BJP and the Left Front did not join in this government.
Decline of Congress
The defeat of the Congress party marked the end of Congress dominance over the Indian party system. Do you remember the discussion in
Chapters about the restoration of the Congress system? Way back in the late sixties, the dominance of the Congress party was challenged;
but the Congress under the leadership of Indira Gandhi, managed to re-establish its predominant position in politics. The nineties saw yet another challenge to the predominant position of the Congress. It did not, however, mean the emergence of any other single party to fill in its place.
The National
Government lead by V. P.
Singh was supported by the Left (represented here by Jyoti
Basu) as well as the BJP (represented by
L. K. Advani)
Credit: Sudhir Tailang /HT Book of Cartoons
Reprint 2026-27
Recent Developments in Indian Politics 141
Thus, began an era of multi-party system. To be sure, a large number of political parties always contested elections in our country.
Our Parliament always had representatives from several political parties. What happened after 1989 was the emergence of several parties in such a way that one or two parties did not get most of the votes or seats. This also meant that no single party secured a clear majority of seats in any Lok Sabha election held since 1989 till
2014. This development initiated an era of coalition governments at the Centre, in which regional parties played a crucial role in forming ruling alliances but in 2014 and 2019 Lok Sabha election, the BJP got clear majority on its own.
Let’s re-search
Talk to your parents about their memories of the events happening since the 1990s. Ask them what they felt were the most significant events of the period. Sit together in groups and draw a comprehensive list of the events reported by your parents, see which events get cited most, and compare them with what the chapter suggests were the most significant. You can also discuss why some events are more important for some and not for others.
Alliance politics
The nineties also saw the emergence of powerful parties and movements that represented the Dalit and backward castes (Other Backward
Classes or OBCs). Many of these parties represented powerful regional assertion as well. These parties played an important role in the United Front government that came to power in 1996. The United
Front was similar to the National Front of 1989 for it included Janata
Dal and several regional parties. This time the BJP did not support the government. The United Front government was supported by the Congress. This shows how unstable the political equations were.
In 1989, both the Left and the BJP supported the National Front
Government because they wanted to keep the Congress out of power.
In 1996, the Left continued to support the non-Congress government but this time the Congress, supported it, as both the Congress and the Left wanted to keep the BJP out of power.
They did not succeed for long, as the BJP continued to consolidate its position in the elections of 1991 and 1996. It emerged as the largest party in the 1996 election and was invited to form the government. But most other parties were opposed to its policies and therefore, the BJP government could not secure a majority in the Lok Sabha. It finally came to power by leading
Reprint 2026-27
142 Politics in India since Independence a coalition government from May 1998 to June 1999 and was re-elected in October 1999. Atal Behari Vajpayee was the Prime
Minister during both these NDA governments and his government formed in 1999 completed its full term.
Thus, with the elections of 1989, a long phase of coalition politics began in India. Since then, there have been eleven governments at the Centre, all of which have either been coalition governments or minority governments supported by other parties, which did not join the government. In this new phase, any government could be formed only with the participation or support of many regional parties. This applied to the National Front in 1989, the United Front in 1996 and
1997, the BJP-led coalition in 1998, the NDA in 1999, the UPA in
2004 and 2009. However, this trend changed in 2014.
Let us connect this development with what we have learnt so far.
The era of coalition governments may be seen as a long-term trend resulting from relatively silent changes that were taking place over the last few decades.
We saw in Chapter Two that in earlier times, it was the Congress party itself that was a ‘coalition’ of different interests and different social strata and groups. This gave rise to the term ‘Congress system’.
A cartoonist’s depiction of the change from one-party dominance to a multi-party alliance system.
Credit: Ajit Ninan/India Today
Reprint 2026-27
Recent Developments in Indian Politics 143
CENTRAL GOVERNMENTS SINCE 1989
Note: The blank space is for you to record more information on the major policies, performance and controversies about that government.
For more details about the current and former Prime Ministers, visit http://pmindia.gov.in/en
Reprint 2026-27
144 Politics in India since Independence
We also saw in Chapters that, especially since the late 1960s, various sections had been leaving the Congress fold and forming separate political parties of their own. We also noted the rise of many regional parties in the period after 1977. While these developments weakened the Congress party, they did not enable any single party to replace the Congress.
OK, coalitions are the logic of democratic politics in our kind of society. Does that mean that we will always have coalitions? Or can the national parties consolidate their positions again?
not worried about whether it is a single party or coalition government. I am more worried about what they do. Does a coalition government involve more compromises? Can we not have bold and imaginative policies in a coalition?
Political Rise of Other Backward Classes
One long-term development of this period was the rise of Other
Backward Classes as a political force. You have already come across this term ‘OBC’. This refers to the administrative category ‘Other
Backward Classes’. These are communities other than SC and ST who suffer from educational and social backwardness. These are also referred to as ‘backward castes’. We have already noted in Chapter
Six that the support for the Congress among many sections of the
‘backward castes’ had declined. This created a space for non-Congress parties that drew more support from these communities. You would recall that the rise of these parties first found political expression at the national level in the form of the Janata Party government in
1977. Many of the constituents of the Janata Party, like the Bharatiya
Kranti Dal and the Samyukta Socialist Party, had a powerful rural base among some sections of the OBC.
‘Mandal’ implemented
In the 1980s, the Janata Dal brought together a similar combination of political groups with strong support among the OBCs. The decision of the National Front government to implement the recommendations
Reprint 2026-27
Recent Developments in Indian Politics 145 of the Mandal Commission further helped in shaping the politics of
‘Other Backward Classes’. The intense national debate for and against reservation in jobs made people from the OBC communities more aware of this identity. Thus, it helped those who wanted to mobilise these groups in politics. This period saw the emergence of many parties that sought better opportunities for OBCs in education and employment and also raised the question of the share of power enjoyed by the OBCs. These parties claimed that since OBCs constituted a large segment of Indian society, it was only democratic that the OBCs should get adequate representation in administration and have their due share of political power.
Implementation of Mandal Commission report sparked off agitations and political upheavals.
Reprint 2026-27
146 Politics in India since Independence
The Mandal Commission
Reservations for the OBC were in existence in southern States since the 1960s, if not earlier. But this policy was not operative in north Indian States. It was during the tenure of Janata Party government in 1977-79 that the demand for reservations for backward castes in north India and at the national level was strongly raised. Karpoori Thakur, the then Chief Minister of Bihar, was a pioneer in this direction. His government had introduced a new policy of reservations for
OBCs in Bihar. Following this, the central government appointed a Commission in 1978 to look into and recommend ways to improve the conditions of the backward classes. This was the second time since Independence that the government had appointed such a commission. Therefore, this commission was officially known as the Second Backward Classes Commission. Popularly, the commission is known as the Mandal Commission, after the name of its
Chairperson, Bindeshwari Prasad Mandal.
The Mandal Commission was set up to investigate the extent of educational and social backwardness among various sections of Indian society and recommend ways of identifying these
‘backward classes’. It was also expected to give its recommendations on the ways in which this backwardness could be ended. The Commission gave its recommendations in 1980. By then the Janata government had fallen. The Commission advised that ‘backward classes’ should be understood to mean ‘backward castes’, since many castes, other than the Scheduled Castes, were also treated as low in the caste hierarchy. The Commission did a survey and found that these backward castes had a very low presence in both educational institutions and in employment in public services. It therefore recommended reserving 27 per cent of seats in educational institutions and government jobs for these groups. The Mandal Commission also made many other recommendations, like, land reform, to improve the conditions of the OBCs.
In August 1990, the National Front government decided to implement one of the recommendations of Mandal Commission pertaining to reservations for OBCs in jobs in the central government and its undertakings. This decision sparked agitations and violent protests in many cities of north India. The decision was also challenged in the Supreme Court and came to be known as the ‘Indira Sawhney case’, after the name of one of the petitioners. In
November 1992, the Supreme Court gave a ruling upholding the decision of the government. There were some differences among political parties about the manner of implementation of this decision. But now the policy of reservation for OBCs has support of all the major political parties of the country.
B.P. Mandal (1918-1982): M.P. from
Bihar for 1967-1970 and 1977-1979; chaired the Second Backward
Classes Commission that recommended reservations for Other
Backward Classes; a socialist leader from Bihar;
Chief Minister of Bihar for just a month and a half in
1968; joined the Janata
Party in 1977.
Reprint 2026-27
Recent Developments in Indian Politics 147
Political fallouts
The 1980s also saw the rise of political organisation of the Dalits.
In 1978 the Backward and Minority Communities Employees
Federation (BAMCEF) was formed. This organisation was not an ordinary trade union of government employees. It took a strong position in favour of political power to the ‘bahujan’ – the SC,
ST, OBC and minorities. It was out of this that the subsequent
Dalit Shoshit Samaj Sangharsh Samiti and later the Bahujan
Samaj Party (BSP) emerged under the leadership of Kanshi
Ram. The BSP began as a small party supported largely by Dalit voters in Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh. But in 1989 and the 1991 elections, it achieved a breakthrough in Uttar Pradesh.
This was the first time in independent India that a political party supported mainly by Dalit voters had achieved this kind of political success.
In fact, the BSP, under Kanshi Ram’s
