Glossary Glossary
Abundance: A very large quantity of something.
Accolade: An expression of praise or an acknowledgement of merit.
Adaptation: How a living thing changes slightly over time to survive in a changing environment.
Afterlife: A life that begins after death.
Allotment: The giving or sharing out of something.
Altitude: The height of an object above sea level.
Ancient: Of or from a long time ago.
Archaeologist: A person who studies human history and prehistory through the excavation of sites and the analysis of physical remains.
Ascetic: Someone who engages in rigorous spiritual practices to attain a higher consciousness.
Astronaut: A person who is trained to travel in a spacecraft into outer space.
Attachment: The condition of having a bond with someone or something, usually through sentiment or habit.
Auspicious: Favourable or bringing luck; for instance, ‘an auspicious beginning’.
Avalanche: The sudden fall of snow, ice or rocks from a mountainside, often occurring when the snow starts melting.
Bay: A broad inlet of the sea where the land curves inwards.
Bewildering: Confusing or perplexing.
Bitumen: A black, sticky substance such as tar or asphalt.
Bonds: Connections.
Bulldozer: A heavy vehicle with a large blade in front used to move soil or
Cardinal direction: One of the four main directions — north, south, east and west.
Carve: To cut (a hard material) in order to produce an object, design.
Chant: To sing, often loudly;
rhythmically and repeatedly.
Choke: To have severe difficulty in breathing because of a constricted or obstructed throat or a lack of air.
Chore: A routine task, especially a household one.
Clink: A sharp ringing sound.
Cloudburst: A sudden violent rainstorm.
Collaborate: Work jointly on an activity or project.
Collapse: To suddenly fall down or give way; such a fall.
Commemorate: To mark the memory of someone or something, often through a ceremony.
Commonality: A sharing of features or characteristics.
Reprint 2026-27
Conceive: To form a mental representation of something.
Confiscate: When some authority seizes someone’s property.
Confluence: The meeting point of two or more rivers.
Consciousness: The quality or state of being aware, for instance of something within oneself.
Conservation: The prevention of wasteful use of a resource.
Constellation: A group of stars forming a recognisable pattern in the sky.
Constitution: A document that spells out the basic principles and laws of a
Consult: To seek information or advice
Consumption: Eating or drinking something; purchasing goods or services.
Context: The background or setting for an event, statement or idea, in terms of which it can be fully understood.
Convention: A way in which something is usually done or agreed upon.
Conventional: Based on or in accordance with a convention.
Convicted: Having been declared guilty, by a jury or a judge, of an offence.
Cooperative: A group of people who voluntarily come together to meet their economic and social needs in a formal
Cosmos: The world or the universe as an ordered and harmonious system.
Crucial: Of great importance.
Cultivate: To prepare and use land or any space for crops or gardening.
Dairy: A place where milk is collected and stored.
Decentralise: To transfer control to local offices or authorities.
Dedicated: Devoted to a task or purpose.
Defy: To openly resist or refuse to obey.
Deity: A god or goddess.
Deliberate: Done consciously and intentionally.
Delightful: Highly pleasing.
Depict: To represent or describe through words or a drawing, painting, etc.
Descending: Moving or sloping downwards.
Destiny: Events that will necessarily happen to a particular person, or a power that controls future events.
Deviate: To change from the usual way.
Digging: Extracting from the ground by moving earth.
Dispute: A disagreement or argument.
Distress: Extreme anxiety, sorrow, or
Diverse: Showing a great deal of variety.
Economic sectors: Broad groups of activities that help with the economic prosperity of a nation.
Eliminate: To completely remove or get
Reprint 2026-27
Elite: Higher layers of the society, such as rulers, officials, administrators, and often priests.
Empower: To give someone or a group of people the authority or power to do something.
Empowerment: The empowering of someone or a group of people.
Encounter: Unexpectedly meeting with someone or something.
Endanger: To put someone or something at risk or in danger.
Enforce: To cause (something) to happen by necessity or force.
Engrave: To cut or carve a text or a design on some hard surface such as stone or metal.
Enhance: To further improve the quality, value, or extent of something.
Enrich: Improve or enhance the quality or value of.
Enshrine: To preserve something highly respected in a special place or text, etc.
Epic: A long poem generally narrating the adventures of heroes and other great figures of the past.
Equator: An imaginary line on the surface of the Earth that runs at 0° latitude, dividing the Earth into the
Northern and Southern Hemispheres.
Era: A distinct period of time.
Erosion: The loss of soil, rock or land caused typically by the action of the sea, wind or rain.
Eruption: A sudden outbreak of something, typically something unwelcome or noisy.
Estuary: The place where a river meets the sea.
Evolution: The process by which different kinds of living organisms have developed from earlier forms during the history of the earth.
Excavate: To dig out.
Excavator: A person who excavates an archaeological site; a large machine that digs and moves earth.
Excursion: A short journey or trip, especially one taken as a leisure activity.
Exemplify: To illustrate by giving an example, or to be an example of.
Exert: To make a physical or mental
Expanse: A wide continuous area.
Exploitation: The action or fact of treating someone unfairly in order to benefit from their work.
Exploration: The activity of searching and finding out about something.
Export: Goods or services produced in one country and sold in another country.
Extraction: The action of extracting something, especially using effort or
Facilitate: To make an action or process easier.
Factory: Building or group of buildings where final products are manufactured or put together.
Fauna: The animal life of a particular region or period of time.
Favourable: To the advantage of someone or something.
Reprint 2026-27
Fee: A payment made in exchange for professional advice or services.
Figurine: A statuette, especially one of a human form.
Financial: Relating to money.
Finished goods: Goods that have completed the manufacturing process.
Flash flood: A sudden local flood, often caused by a cloudburst.
Flora: The plant life of a particular region or period of time.
Folklore: The traditional beliefs, customs, and stories of a community, passed through the generations by word of mouth.
Foothills: A low hill at the base of a mountain or mountain range.
Formulate: To express or prepare methodically.
Fortification: A massive wall surrounding a settlement or city, generally for protective purposes.
Fossils: Remains or impressions of parts of plants or animals found preserved in a petrified form within layers of soil or rocks.
Foster: To encourage the development of something.
Fragile: Easily broken or damaged.
Framework: A basic structure underlying a system, concept, or text.
Franchise: A constitutional right or privilege; or a right granted to an individual or group enabling them to carry out specified commercial activities.
Full-fledged: Completely developed or established.
Fundamental: Something that is very important and forms the base or foundation for something.
Generation: All of the people born and living at about the same time, regarded collectively.
Genetics: The branch of biology that studies how, in plants, animals or humans, certain features and characteristics get passed down from one generation to the next.
Glaring: Giving out or reflecting a strong light.
Gratitude: The quality of being thankful; appreciation for kindness.
Greenhouse farming: Growing plants in a controlled environment, like a glass or plastic structure, to improve crop
Greenwich Mean Time (GMT):
The mean solar time at the Royal
Observatory in Greenwich, London, used as a reference time for the world.
Gregorian calendar: The calendar now used internationally.
Gulf: A part of the sea nearly surrounded with land.
Hailstone: A small ball of ice falling from the sky in showers.
Hamlet: A small settlement or small village.
Harass: To create an unpleasant or hostile situation.
Harmoniously: With harmony.
Reprint 2026-27
Harmony: The state of being without conflict or disagreement; the pleasing quality of any situation.
Healer: Someone who uses traditional practices to relieve or heal diseases.
Herd: A herd is a large group of animals; to herd is to keep or look after such a group.
Heritage: Valued objects and qualities such as historic buildings and cultural traditions that have been passed down from previous generations.
Historian: A person who studies and writes about the past.
History: The study of the human past.
Homemaker: A person who looks after a home, including housework.
House: An assembly where laws are discussed or passed.
Immense: Extremely large or great.
Implementation: The process of putting a decision or plan into effect.
Import: The purchase of goods by one country from other countries.
Indian Standard Time (IST): The official time observed throughout India, which is 5 hours and 30 minutes ahead
Ingredient: An element of a whole;
often, any of the foods or substances that are combined to make a particular
Inhabitants: People who live in a particular place.
Inscriptions: Words or texts written or cut in some material such as stone or,
Interdependence: The dependence of two or more people or things on each
International Date Line: An imaginary line on the Earth's surface located at about 180° longitude, where, by convention, one calendar day is added or subtracted when crossed.
Intimidating: Something or someone that makes you feel scared or nervous.
Intrigue: Causing interest or curiosity about something.
Invaders: A person or group that forcefully enters a country or region.
Invocation: The calling for the assistance or presence of some superior being.
Judiciously: With good judgement or
Landscape: All the visible features of an area of land.
Landslide: The sudden collapse of a mass of earth or rock from a mountainside.
Lava: The molten liquid rock that flows out of a volcano, or the rock so formed once it has cooled off.
Lichen: A plant-like organism that generally clings to rocks, walls or trees.
Livestock: Farm animals regarded as an asset.
Logistics: The detailed organisation and implementation of a complex operation.
Manifest: To make evident through actions, events, or occurrences.
Reprint 2026-27
Manuscript: A document written by hand on some material such as bark, cloth, palm leaf or paper.
Marine: Related to or found in the oceans and seas.
Market: A place where people engage in the exchange of goods and services.
Marvel: To experience intense surprise or interest.
Meagre: Lacking in quantity or quality.
Mechanism: Part of a machine, or system of parts working together in a machine.
Meridian of longitude: An imaginary half-circle that runs from the North Pole to the South Pole on the surface of the earth and indicates how far east or west a point on the Earth’s surface is from the Prime Meridian.
Metallurgy: The technique of extracting metals from nature, purifying or combining them, as well as the scientific study of metals and their properties.
Meticulous: Showing great attention to detail; very careful and precise.
Middlemen: Persons who buy goods from producers and sell them to consumers at a fee.
Migrate: People moving from one place to another for some length of time.
Monetary: Relating to money or currency.
Monetary value: Value of something that can be measured in terms of
Money’s worth: The monetary value that people place on an object based on the benefit they derive from it.
Monk: A man who leaves life in the world to become part of a community leading a life dedicated to religious or spiritual pursuits.
Montane forest: A type of forest that grows in mountainous regions.
Moss: A small green plant without flowers or true roots, often spreading in a cushion-like cover.
Motto: A short sentence or phrase chosen as the beliefs or ideals of an individual, family, or institution.
Narrative: A story or account of events, experiences, or interactions, typically presented in a structured format.
Native: A person born in a specified region or country and still lives there.
Navigate: The act of directing a ship, aircraft, etc. from one place to another, or the science of finding a way from one place to another.
Navigation: The act of navigating.
Nominal: In name only.
North Pole: The point in the Northern
Hemisphere where the Earth’s axis of rotation meets the Earth's surface, located at 90°N.
Nuclear family: A family consisting of parents (or a parent) and their children, but not including aunts, uncles, grandparents, etc.
Numerous: Great in number; many.
Nun: The female equivalent of a monk.
Reprint 2026-27
Offshoot: A thing that develops from something else.
Orchard: An enclosed piece of land planted with fruit trees.
Oversee: To supervise a person or persons and their work.
Parallels of latitude: Imaginary lines on the surface of the Earth that run east to west, parallel to the Equator, and indicate how far north or south a point on the Earth’s surface is from the
Equator.
Paraphrase: To express the meaning of something written or spoken, but using different words, especially to achieve greater clarity or to summarise.
Pasteurisation: A process by which milk is preserved by heating it to a specific temperature to kill harmful bacteria.
Payment in kind: A non-cash payment received for the work performed.
Perceive: To be aware of something or someone.
Perceptible: That can be seen, heard, felt, tasted, smelled, or somehow noticed.
Perspective: The way you see or think about some issue.
Pigment: A substance that gives something a particular colour when it is present in it or added to it.
Pilgrim: A person who journeys to a sacred place for religious reasons.
Pitch in: To intervene by contributing something.
Precipitation: Water from the atmosphere reaching the ground in any form — rain, snow and hail are the most common forms of precipitation.
Precise: Marked by accuracy of expression or detail.
Prime Meridian: The meridian of longitude designated at 0°, which passes through Greenwich, England.
Proportion: A part, share, or number considered in comparison with a whole.
Prosperity: The state of being prosperous.
Prosperous: Having or bringing wealth and success.
Pulses: A category of crops that includes beans, peas, lentils (dal).
Radiate: To emit (energy, especially light or heat) in the form of rays or
Regulate: To control by means of rules and regulations.
Relief: A design that stands out from the surface of a panel, which may be of stone, wood, ceramic, etc.
Renovation: Making something (such as a building) new again.
Renowned: Known or talked about by many people; famous.
Reservoir: A large natural or artificial lake used as a source of water supply.
Resilience: The capacity to meet challenges and difficulties, adapt to them or overcome them.
Resolve: To settle or find a solution to.
Retail: The sale of goods in small quantities for use by the end consumer.
Reprint 2026-27
Reverence: Deep respect for someone or something.
Rob: To take property unlawfully from a person or place.
Rounded off: Approximated to a simpler number.
Salary: A fixed regular payment generally paid monthly by an employer to an employee.
Scholar: A specialist in a particular branch of study.
Scorching: Very hot.
Sea level: The average level of the surface of the oceans, also called ‘mean sea level’.
Sea: A large body of salty water that is smaller than an ocean and partly or completely surrounded by land.
Secondary sector: The group of activities that involves processing of raw materials derived from the primary sector into products for sale or consumption.
Seeker: A sage, yogi, philosopher or intellectual who seeks the truths of this
Segregation: The action or state of setting someone (or a group of people)
or something apart from others.
Settlement: A place where people establish a community.
Shrine: A sacred space or place.
Source of history: A place, a person, text or an object from which we gather information about some past event or
South Pole: The point in the Southern
Hemisphere where the Earth’s axis of rotation meets the Earth's surface, located at 90°S.
Species: A group of closely related living beings that have similar characteristics and breed with each
Spectacular: Beautiful in a dramatic and eye-catching way.
Spiritual: Concerned with something greater than oneself, such as the spirit or soul (ātman in Sanskrit and many
Indian languages).
Spirituality: The search for, or attainment of, a deeper or higher dimension beyond our current personality.
Standard Time Zone: A zone of typically 15° of longitude wide, which corresponds to one hour of time difference from the next time zone.
Statecraft: The management of state affairs.
Steep: Rising or falling sharply.
Stirring: Causing excitement or strong emotion.
Subcontinent: A large distinguishable part of a continent.
Submerge: Cause (something) to go under water.
Surge: A sudden powerful forward or upward movement, for instance by a crowd or by a natural force such as the
Synthetic: Not natural; artificial.
Reprint 2026-27
Terrace farming: Cultivation on steps of land that are cut into mountain
Terrain: A piece or stretch of land, from the point of view of its physical features.
Terrestrial: On or relating to the earth.
Tertiary sector: The group of activities that involves the provision of services which complement both primary and secondary sectors, such as transportation, banking, etc.
