Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How?
9 December1946 and reassembled as Constituent Assembly for divided
India on 14 August 1947. Its members were chosen by indirect election by the members of the Provincial Legislative Assemblies that had been established under the Government of India Act, 1935. The Constituent
Assembly was composed roughly along the lines suggested by the plan proposed by the committee of the British cabinet, known as the
Cabinet Mission. According to this plan:
± Each Province and each Princely State or group of States were allotted seats proportional to their respective population roughly in the ratio of 1:10,00,000. As a result the Provinces (that were under direct British rule) were to elect 292 members while the
Princely States were allotted a minimum of 93 seats.
± The seats in each Province were distributed among the three main communities, Muslims, Sikhs and general, in proportion to their respective populations.
± Members of each community in the Provincial Legislative
Assembly elected their own representatives by the method of proportional representation with single transferable vote.
± The method of selection in the case of representatives of Princely
States was to be determined by consultation.
For more details, visit http://164.100.47.194/loksabha/constituent/facts.html
“We must make our political democracy a social democracy as well.
Political democracy cannot last unless there lies at the base of it social democracy. What does social democracy mean? It means a way of life, which recognises liberty, equality and fraternity as the principles of life. These principles of liberty, equality and fraternity are not to be treated as separate items in a trinity. They form a union of trinity in the sense that to divorce one from the other is to defeat the very purpose of democracy. Liberty cannot be divorced from equality, equality cannot be divorced from liberty. Nor can liberty and equality be divorced from fraternity. Without equality, liberty would produce the supremacy of the few over the many.
Equality without liberty would kill individual initiative. Without fraternity, liberty and equality could not become a natural course of things…”
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, CAD, Vol. XI, p.979, 25 November 1949
Are the principles of liberty, equality and fraternity being practised in your classroom? How can they coexist? Discuss this with your friends.
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
The previous section discusses the three factors that make a constitution effective and respectable. How far does the Indian Constitution pass this test?
Composition of the Constituent Assembly
As a consequence of the Partition under the plan of
3 June 1947 those members who were elected from territories which fell under Pakistan ceased to be members of the Constituent Assembly. The number of members in the Assembly was reduced to 299. The
Constitution was adopted on 26 November 1949. 284 members were actually present on 24 January 1950 and appended their signature to the Constitution as finally passed. The Constitution came into force on 26 January
1950. The Constitution was thus framed against the backdrop of the horrendous violence that the Partition unleashed on the subcontinent. But it is a tribute to the fortitude of the framers that they were not only able to draft a constitution under immense pressure, but also learnt the right lessons from the unimaginable violence that accompanied the Partition. The Constitution was committed to a new conception of citizenship, where not only would minorities be secure, but religious identity would have no bearing on citizenship rights.
But this account of the composition of the Constituent
Assembly that drafted the Constitution touches upon only the surface of how our Constitution was made. Although, the members of the Assembly were not elected by universal suffrage, there was a serious attempt to make the Assembly a representative body. Members of all religions were given representation under the scheme described above; in addition, the Assembly had twenty- eight members from the Scheduled Castes. In terms of political parties, the Congress dominated the Assembly occupying as many as eighty-two per cent of the seats in the Assembly after the Partition. The Congress itself was such a diverse party that it managed to accommodate almost all shades of opinion within it.
What would have happened if the Constituent Assembly was elected by all the people of
India? Could it be very different from what it was?
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How?
The Principle of Deliberation
The authority of the Constituent Assembly does not come only from the fact that it was broadly, though not perfectly, representative. It comes from the procedures it adopted to frame the Constitution and the values its members brought to their deliberations. While in any assembly that claims to be representative, it is desirable that diverse sections of society participate, it is equally important that they participate not only as representatives of their own identity or community. Each member deliberated upon the Constitution with the interests of the whole nation in mind. There were often disagreements amongst members, but few of these disagreements could be traced to members protecting their own interests.
There were legitimate differences of principle. And the differences were many: should India adopt a centralised or decentralised system of government? What should be the relations between the States and the centre? What should be the powers of the judiciary? Should the
Constitution protect property rights? Almost every issue that lies at the foundation of a modern state was discussed with great sophistication. Only one provision of the Constitution was passed without virtually any debate: the introduction of universal suffrage (meaning that all citizens reaching a certain age, would be entitled to be voters irrespective of religion, caste, education, gender or income).
So, while the members felt no need at all to discuss the issue of who should have the right to vote, every other matter was seriously discussed and debated. Nothing can be a better testament to the democratic commitment of this Assembly.
The Constitution drew its authority from the fact that members of the Constituent Assembly engaged in what one might call public reason. The members of the Assembly placed a great emphasis on discussion and reasoned argument. They did not simply advance their own interests, but gave principled reasons to other members for their positions. The very act of giving reasons to others makes you move away from simply a narrow consideration of your own interest because you have to give reasons to others to make them go along with your view point. The voluminous debates in the
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
Constituent Assembly, where each clause of the Constitution was subjected to scrutiny and debate, is a tribute to public reason at its best. These debates deserved to be memorialised as one of the most significant chapters in the history of constitution making, equal in importance to the French and American revolutions.
Procedures
The importance of public reason was emphasised in the mundane procedures of the Assembly as well. The Constituent Assembly had eight major Committees on different subjects. Usually,
Jawaharlal Nehru, Rajendra
Prasad, Sardar Patel or B.R.
Ambedkar chaired these
Committees. These were not men who agreed with each other on many things. Ambedkar had been a bitter critic of the Congress and Gandhi, accusing them of not doing enough for the upliftment of Scheduled
Castes. Patel and Nehru disagreed on many issues. Nevertheless, they all worked together. Each
Committee usually drafted particular provisions of the
Constitution which were then subjected to debate by the entire
Assembly. Usually an attempt was made to reach a consensus with the belief that provisions agreed to by all, would not be detrimental to any particular interests. Some provisions were subject to the vote.
But in each instance every single argument, query or concern was responded to with great care and
READ A CARTOON
The President of the Constituent Assembly,
Dr. Rajendra Prasad and the Chairman of the Drafting Committee, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar greeting each other
“... I have realised as nobody else could have, with what zeal and devotion the members of the Drafting Committee and especially its
Chairman, Dr. Ambedkar in spite of his indifferent health, have worked. We could never make a decision which was or could be ever so right as when we put him on the
Drafting Committee and made him its
Chairman. He has not only justified his selection but has added lustre to the work which he has done. In this connection, it would be invidious to make any distinction as among the other members of the
Committee. I know they have all worked with the same zeal and devotion as its
Chairman, and they deserve the thanks of the country.”
Dr. Rajendra Prasad
CAD, Vol. XI, p.994, 26 November 1949
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How?
in writing. The Assembly met for one hundred and sixty six days, spread over two years and eleven months. Its sessions were open to the press and the public alike.
Inheritance of the nationalist movement Inheritance of the nationalist movement Inheritance of the nationalist movement Inheritance of the nationalist movement Inheritance of the nationalist movement
But no constitution is simply a product of the Assembly that produces it. An Assembly as diverse as the
Constituent Assembly of India could not have functioned if there was no background consensus on the main principles the Constitution should enshrine. These principles were forged during the long struggle for freedom. In a way, the Constituent Assembly was giving concrete shape and form to the principles it had inherited from the nationalist movement. For decades preceding the promulgation of the Constitution, the nationalist movement had debated many questions that were relevant to the making of the constitution — the shape and form of government India should have, the values it should uphold, the inequalities it should overcome.
Answers forged in those debates were given their final form in the Constitution.
Perhaps the best summary of the principles that the nationalist movement brought to the Constituent
Assembly is the Objective Resolution (the resolution that defined the aims of the Assembly) moved by Nehru in
1946. This resolution encapsulated the aspirations and values behind the Constitution. What the previous section terms as substantive provisions of the constitution is inspired by and summed up by the values incorporated in the Objectives Resolution. Based on this resolution, our Constitution gave institutional expression to these fundamental commitments: equality, liberty, democracy, sovereignty and a cosmopolitan identity. Thus, our
Constitution is not merely a maze of rules and procedures, but a moral commitment to establish a government that will fulfil the many promises that the nationalist movement held before the people.
What would have happened if we got independence in 1937?
Or if we had to wait till 1957?
Would our Constitution be very different from what it is
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
Main points of the Objectives Resolution
√ India is an independent, sovereign, republic;
√ India shall be a Union of erstwhile British Indian territories, Indian States, and other parts outside
British India and Indian States as are willing to be a part of the Union;
√ Territories forming the Union shall be autonomous units and exercise all powers and functions of the
Government and administration, except those assigned to or vested in the Union;
√ All powers and authority of sovereign and independent
India and its constitution shall flow from the people;
√ All people of India shall be guaranteed and secured social, economic and political justice; equality of status and opportunities and equality before law; and fundamental freedoms - of speech, expression, belief, faith, worship, vocation, association and action - subject to law and public morality;
√ The minorities, backward and tribal areas, depressed and other backward classes shall be provided adequate safeguards;
√ The territorial integrity of the Republic and its sovereign rights on land, sea and air shall be maintained according to justice and law of civilized nations;
√ The land would make full and willing contribution to the promotion of world peace and welfare of mankind.
Institutional arrangements
The third factor ensuring effectiveness of a constitution is a balanced arrangement of the institutions of government. The basic principle is that government must be democratic and committed to the welfare of the people. The Constituent Assembly spent a lot of time on evolving the right balance among the various institutions like the executive, the legislature and the judiciary. This led to the adoption of the parliamentary form and the federal arrangement, which would distribute governmental powers between the
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How?
legislature and the executive on the one hand and between the States and the central government on the other hand.
While evolving the most balanced governmental arrangements, the makers of our Constitution did not hesitate to learn from experiments and experiences of other countries. Thus, the framers of the Constitution were not averse to borrowing from other constitutional traditions. Indeed, it is a testament to their wide learning that they could lay their hands upon any intellectual argument, or historical example that was necessary for fulfilling the task at hand. So they borrowed a number of provisions from different countries.
But borrowing these ideas was not slavish imitation.
Far from it. Each provision of the Constitution had to be defended on grounds that it was suited to Indian problems and aspirations. India was extremely lucky to have an Assembly that instead of being parochial in its outlook could take the best available everywhere in the world and make it their own.
Was it a borrowed constitution then? Why could we not have a constitution that does not borrow anything from anywhere else?
“One likes to ask whether there can be anything new in a
Constitution framed at this hour in the history of the world… The only new things, if there can be any, in a Constitution framed so late in the day are the variations made to remove the faults and to accommodate it to the needs of the country.”
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar
CAD, Vol. VII, p.37, 4 November 1948
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar presiding over a discussion in the
Constituent Assembly
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
Provisions adapted from constitutions of different countries
British Constitution
First Past the Post
Parliamentary Form of
Government
The idea of the rule of law
Institution of the Speaker and her/his role
Law-making procedure
United States
Constitution
Charter of
Fundamental
Power of Judicial
Review and independence of the judiciary
Constitution
Directive
Principles of
State Policy
Constitution
Principles of
Liberty, Equality and Fraternity
Canadian
Constitution
A quasi-federal form of government (a federal system with a strong central government)
The idea of Residual
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How?
Conclusion
It is a tribute to the wisdom and foresight of the makers of the
Constitution that they presented to the nation a document that enshrined fundamental values and highest aspirations shared by the people. This is one of the reasons why this most intricately crafted document has not only survived but become a living reality, when so many other constitutions have perished with the paper they were first written on.
India’s Constitution is a unique document which in turn became an exemplar for many other constitutions, most notably
South Africa. The main purpose behind the long search that went on for almost three years was to strike the right balance so that institutions created by the Constitution would not be haphazard or tentative arrangements but would be able to accommodate the aspirations of the people of India for a long time to come. You will know more about these arrangements through the study of the remaining chapters in this book.
Exercises
1. Which of these is not a function of the constitution?
a. It gives a guarantee of the rights of the citizen.
b. It marks out different spheres of power for different branches of government.
c. It ensures that good people come to power.
d. It gives expression to some shared values.
2. Which of the following is a good reason to conclude that the authority of the constitution is higher than that of the parliament?
a. The constitution was framed before the parliament came into b. The constitution makers were more eminent leaders than the members of the parliament.
c. The constitution specifies how parliament is to be formed and what are its powers.
d. The constitution cannot be amended by the parliament.
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
3. State whether the following statements about a constitution are True or False.
a. Constitutions are written documents about formation and power of the government.
b. Constitutions exist and are required only in democratic countries.
c. Constitution is a legal document that does not deal with ideals and values.
d. A constitution gives its citizens a new identity.
4. State whether the following inferences about the making of the Indian
Constitution are Correct or Incorrect. Give reasons to support your a. The Constituent Assembly did not represent the Indian people since it was not elected by all citizens.
b. Constitution making did not involve any major decision since there was a general consensus among the leaders at that time about its basic framework.
c. There was little originality in the Constitution, for much of it was borrow
