Indian Constitution at Work upon religion. Linguistic and cultural minorities are also included in this provision. Minorities are groups that have common language or religion and in a particular part of the country or in the country as a whole, they are outnumbered by some other social section. Such communities have a culture, language and a script of their own, and have the right to conserve and develop these.
All minorities, religious or linguistic, can set up their own educational institutions. By doing so, they can preserve and develop their own culture. The government will not, while granting aid to educational institutions, discriminate against any educational institution on the basis that it is under the management of minority community.
RIGHT TO CONSTITUTIONAL REMEDIES
One would agree that our Constitution contains a very impressive list of Fundamental Rights. But merely writing down a list of rights is not enough. There has to be a way through which they could be realised in practice and defended against any attack on these rights.
“A heavy responsibility would be cast on the majority to see that in fact the minorities feel secure. …the only safety for the minorities lies in a secular State.
It pays them to be nationalists ...The majority community should not boast of their national outlook. ...They should try to place themselves in the position of the minorities and try to appreciate their fears. All demands for safeguards
...are the products of those fears that the minorities have in their minds, ...as regards their language, their script and also about the services.”
Sardar Hukam Singh
CAD, VIII, p. 322, 26 May 1949
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 2: Rights in the Indian Constitution
Right to constitutional remedies is the means through which this is to be achieved. Dr. Ambedkar considered the right to constitutional remedies as ‘heart and soul of the constitution’. It is so because this right gives a citizen the right to approach a High Court or the Supreme Court to get any of the fundamental rights restored in case of their violation. The Supreme Court and the High Courts can issue orders and give directives to the government for the enforcement of rights.
The courts can issue various special orders known as
± ± ± ± ± Habeas corpus: A writ of habeas corpus means that the court orders that the arrested person should be presented before it. It can also order to set free an arrested person if the manner or grounds of arrest are not lawful or satisfactory.
± ± ± ± ± Mandamus: This writ is issued when the court finds that a particular office holder is not doing legal duty and thereby is infringing on the right of an individual.
± ± ± ± ± Prohibition: This writ is issued by a higher court (High Court or Supreme Court) when a lower court has considered a case going beyond its jurisdiction.
± ± ± ± ± Quo Warranto: If the court finds that a person is holding office but is not entitled to hold that office, it issues the writ of quo warranto and restricts that person from acting as an office holder.
± ± ± ± ± Certiorari: Under this writ, the court orders a lower court or another authority to transfer a matter pending before it to the higher authority or
Apart from the judiciary, many other mechanisms have been created in later years for the protection of rights. You may have heard about the National
Commission on Minorities, the National Commission on
Women, the National Commission on Scheduled Castes,
I am in minority in my locality but majority in the town, minority if you look at my language but majority if you go by my religion… Aren’t we all minorities?
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work etc. These institutions protect the rights of women, minorities or
Dalits. Besides, the National Human Rights Commission has also been established by law to protect the fundamental and other kinds of rights.
National Human Rights Commission (NHRC)
The real test of the rights given by any constitution is in their actual implementation. The poor, illiterate and the deprived sections of the society must be able to exercise their rights. Independent organisations like the People’s
Union for Civil Liberties (PUCL) or People’s Union for
Democratic Rights (PUDR) have been working as watchdogs against the violations of rights. In this background, the government has established in 1993 an institution, the National Human Rights Commission.
The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) is composed of a former chief justice of the Supreme Court of India, a former judge of the Supreme Court, a former chief justice of a High Court and two other members who have knowledge and practical experience in matters relating to human rights.
The Commission’s functions include inquiry at its own initiative or on a petition presented to it by a victim into complaint of violation of human rights; visit to jails to study the condition of the inmates; undertaking and promoting research in the field of human rights, etc.
The Commission receives complaints in thousands every year. These relate to custodial death, custodial rape, disappearances, police excesses, failure in taking action, indignity to women, etc. Its most significant intervention has been on disappeared youth in Punjab and investigation and trial of Gujarat riot cases where its intervention proved effective.
The Commission does not have the power of prosecution. It can merely make recommendations to the government or recommend to the courts to initiate proceedings based on the inquiry that it conducts.
For more details, visit http://www.nhrc.nic.in
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 2: Rights in the Indian Constitution
DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY
The makers of our Constitution knew that independent India was going to face many challenges. Foremost among these was the challenge to bring about equality and well-being of all citizens. They also thought that certain policy direction was required for handling these problems. At the same time, the Constitution did not want future governments to be bound by certain policy decisions.
Therefore, some guidelines were incorporated in the Constitution but they were not made legally enforceable: this means that if a government did not implement a particular guideline, we cannot go to the court asking the court to instruct the government to implement that policy. Thus, these guidelines are ‘non-justiciable’ i.e., parts of the Constitution that cannot be enforced by the judiciary. Those who framed our Constitution thought that the moral force behind these guidelines would ensure that the government would take them seriously. Besides, they expected that the people would also hold the governments responsible for implementing these directives. So, a separate list of policy guidelines is included in the Constitution.
The list of these guidelines is called the Directive Principles of State
What do the Directive Principles contain?
The chapter on Directive Principles lists mainly three things:
± the goals and objectives that we as a society should adopt;
± certain rights that individuals should enjoy apart from the
Fundamental Rights; and
± certain policies that the government should adopt.
You may get some idea of the vision of makers of our Constitution by looking at some of the Directive Principles shown below.
The governments from time to time tried to give effect to some
Directive Principles of State Policy. They passed several zamindari abolition bills, nationalised banks, enacted numerous factory laws, fixed minimum wages, cottage and small industries were promoted and provisions for reservation for the uplift of the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes were made. Such efforts to give effect to the
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
Directive Principles include the right to education, formation of panchayati raj institutions all over the country, partial right to work under employment guarantee programme and the mid-day meal scheme etc.
Check your progress
It is estimated that there are about three million urban homeless in India. Night shelters are not available for more than five per cent of this population. Hundreds of these old, sick homeless people are killed by cold wave during winter. They cannot have ration and voting cards in the absence of any ‘proof of residence’.
Without these documents they also cannot avail government help as needy patients. A large number of these homeless people are casual workers, who earn very low wages. They travel to the city in search of work from different parts of the country.
Use these facts to write a petition to the Supreme Court of
India under the Right to Constitutional Remedies. Your petition should mention:
a. What Fundamental Rights are being denied to the homeless in their everyday life?
b. What kind of order would you request the Supreme Court to issue?
Fundamental Duties of citizens
± In 1976, the 42nd amendment to the Constitution was passed. Among other things, this amendment inserted a list of Fundamental Duties of Citizens. In all, ten duties were enumerated. However, the Constitution does not say anything about enforcing these duties.
± As citizens, we must abide by the Constitution, defend our country, promote harmony among all citizens, protect the environment.
± However, it must be noted that our Constitution does not make the enjoyment of rights dependent or conditional upon fulfilment of duties. In this sense, the inclusion of fundamental duties has not changed the status of our fundamental rights.
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 2: Rights in the Indian Constitution
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AND
DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES
It is possible to see both Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles as complementary to each other. Fundamental Rights restrain the government from doing certain things while Directive
Welfare of the people; Social, economic and political justice;
Raising the standard of living; equitable distribution of resources;
Promotion of international
Non-justiciable rights
Adequate livelihood;
Equal pay for equal work for men and women;
Right against economic exploitation;
Right to work;
Early childhood care and education to children below the age of six years
Policies
Uniform civil code;
Prohibition of consumption of alcoholic liquor;
Promotion of cottage industries;
Prevention of slaughter of useful cattle;
Promotion of village panchayats
DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES
Tell me what is the point of saying nice things in the
Constitution if these cannot be implemented by any court?
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
Principles exhort the government to do certain things. Fundamental
Rights mainly protect the rights of individuals while directive principles ensure the well-being of the entire society.
However, at times, when government intends to implement
Directive Principles of State Policy, it can come in conflict with the
Fundamental Rights of the citizen.
This problem arose when the government sought to pass laws to abolish zamindari system. These measures were opposed on the ground that they violated right to property. However, keeping in mind the societal needs that are greater than the individual interests, the government amended the Constitution to give effect to the Directive
Principles of State Policy. This led to a long legal battle. The executive and the judiciary took different positions. The government claimed that rights can be abridged for giving effect to Directive Principles.
This argument assumed that rights were a hindrance to welfare of the people. On the other hand, the court held the view that
Fundamental Rights were so important and sacred that they cannot be limited even for purposes of implementing Directive Principles.
Right to Property
Behind the controversy about the relationship between rights and directive principles, there was one important reason: in the Constitution, originally, there was a fundamental right to
‘acquire, possess and maintain’ property. But the Constitution made it clear that property could be taken away by the government for public welfare. Since 1950, government made many laws that limited this right to property. This right was at the centre of the long debate over the relationship between rights and directive principles. Finally, in 1973, the Supreme Court gave a decision that the right to property was not part of the basic structure of the Constitution and therefore, parliament had power to abridge this right by an amendment. In 1978, the
44th amendment to the Constitution removed the right to property from the list of Fundamental Rights and converted it into a simple legal right under article 300 A.
What difference, do you think, this change of status makes to the right to property?
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 2: Rights in the Indian Constitution
This generated another complicated debate. This related to the amendment of the Constitution. The government was saying that
Parliament can amend any part of the Constitution. The court was saying that Parliament cannot make an amendment that violated
Fundamental Rights. This controversy was settled by an important decision of the Supreme Court in Kesavananda Bharati case. In this case, the court said that there are certain basic features of the
Constitution and these cannot be changed by Parliament. We shall discuss this in greater detail in Chapter 9 on ‘Constitution as a Living
Document’.
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
Conclusion
In the writings of Jotirao Phuley (1827-1890), a radical social reformer from Maharashtra, we find one of the earliest expressions of the view that rights include both freedom and equality. During the national movement, this idea of rights was further sharpened and expanded to constitutional rights. Our
Constitution reflected this long tradition and listed the fundamental rights. Since 1950, the judiciary has functioned as an important protector of rights.
Judicial interpretations have expanded the scope of rights in many respects. The government and administration of our country function within this overall framework. Rights enforce limitations on the functioning of the government and ensure democratic governance of the country.
Check your progress
Read the main points of the Bill of Rights in the South
African Constitution and the Directive Principles in India.
Which are the common points in the two lists?
Why did the South African Constitution put these in the
Bill of Rights?
If you were writing the constitution for a new country, what would you suggest?
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 2: Rights in the Indian Constitution
Exercises
1. Write true or false against each of these statements:
a) A Bill of Rights lays down the rights enjoyed by the people of a country.
b) A Bill of Rights protects the liberties of an individual.
c) Every country of the world has a Bill of Rights.
d) The Constitution guarantees remedy against violation of Rights.
2. Which of the following is the best description of Fundamental Rights?
a) All the rights an individual should have.
b) All the rights given to citizens by law.
c) The rights given and protected by the Constitution.
d) The rights given by the Constitution that cannot ever be restricted.
3. Read the following situations. Which Fundamental Right is being used or violated in each case and how?
a) Overweight male cabin crew are allowed to get promotion in the national airlines but their women colleagues who gain weight are penalised.
b) A director makes a documentary film that criticises the policies of the government.
c) People displaced by a big dam take out a rally demanding rehabilitation.
d) Andhra society runs Telugu medium schools outside Andhra
Pradesh.
4. Which of the following is a correct interpretation of the Cultural and Educational Rights?
a) Only children belonging to the minority group that has opened educational institution can study there.
b) Government schools must ensure that children of the minority group will be introduced to their belief and culture.
c) Linguistic and religious minorities can open schools for their children and keep it reserved for them.
d) Linguistic and religious minorities can demand that their children must not study in any educational institution except those managed by their own community.
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
5. Which of the following is a violation of Fundamental Rights and a) Not paying minimum wages b) Banning of a book c) Banning of loudspeakers after 9 pm.
d) Making a speech
6. An activist working among the poor says that the poor don’t need
Fundamental Rights. What they need are Directive Principles to be made legally binding. Do you agree with this? Give your reasons.
7. Several reports show that caste groups previously associated with scavenging are forced to continue in this job. Those in positions of authority refuse to give them any other job. Their children are discouraged from pursuing education. Which of their Fundamental
Rights are being violated in this instance?
8. A petition by a human rights group drew attention of the court to the condition of starvation and hunger in the country. Over five crore tonnes of food grains was stored in the godowns of the Food
Corporation of India. Research shows that a large number of ration cardholders do not know about the quantity of food grains they can purchase from fair price shops. It requested the court to order the government to improve its public distribution system.
a. Which different rights does this case involve? How are these rights interlinked?
b. Should these rights form part of the right to life?
9. Read the statement by Somnath Lahiri in the Constitutent Assembly quoted in this chapter. Do you agree with him? If yes, give instances to prove it. If not, give arguments against his position.
10. Which of the Fundamental Rights is in your opinion the most important right? Summarise its provisions and give arguments to show why it is most important.
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 3: Election and Representation
Chapter Three
ELECT
