Indian Constitution at Work of the Lok Sabha is obliged to resign. The principle indicates that the ministry is an executive committee of the Parliament and it collectively governs on behalf of the
Parliament. Collective responsibility is based on the principle of the solidarity of the cabinet. It implies that a vote of no confidence even against a single minister leads to the resignation of the entire Council of Ministers. It also indicates that if a minister does not agree with a policy or decision of the cabinet, he or she must either accept the decision or resign. It is binding on all ministers to pursue or agree to a policy for which there is collective responsibility.
In India, the Prime Minister enjoys a pre-eminent place in the government. The Council of Ministers cannot exist without the Prime Minister. The Council comes into existence only after the Prime Minister has taken the oath of office. The death or resignation of the Prime Minister automatically brings about the dissolution of the Council of Ministers but the demise, dismissal or resignation of a minister only creates a ministerial vacancy. The Prime
Minister acts as a link between the Council of Ministers on the one hand and the President as well as the Parliament on the other. It is this role of the Prime Minister which led
Pt. Nehru to describe him as ‘the linchpin of Government’.
It is also the constitutional obligation of the Prime Minister to communicate to the President all decisions of the
Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the Union and proposals for legislation. The Prime
Minister is involved in all crucial decisions of the government and decides on the policies of the government.
Thus, the power wielded by the Prime Minister flows from various sources: control over the Council of Ministers, leadership of the Lok Sabha, command over the bureaucratic machine, access to media, projection of personalities during elections, projection as national leader during international summitry as well as foreign
Is it that a person becomes Prime
Minister because he/she is powerful or is it that you become powerful once you have become the Prime Minister?
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 4: Executive
However, the power which the Prime Minister wields and actually puts into use depends upon the prevailing political conditions. The position of the Prime Minister and Council of Ministers has been unassailable whenever a single political party has secured majority in the Lok Sabha. However, this has not been the case when governments have been led by coalitions of political parties. Since
1989, we have witnessed many coalition governments in India. Many of these governments could not remain in power for the full term of the Lok Sabha. They were either removed or they resigned due to loss of support of the majority. These developments have affected the working of the parliamentary executive.
In the first place, these developments have resulted in a growing discretionary role of the President in the selection of Prime
Ministers. Secondly, the coalitional nature of Indian politics in this period has necessitated much more consultation between political partners, leading to erosion of prime ministerial authority.
Thirdly, it has also brought restrictions on various prerogatives of the Prime Minister like choosing the ministers and deciding their ranks and portfolios. Fourthly, even the policies and programmes of the government cannot be decided by the Prime
Minister alone. Political parties of different ideologies come together both as pre-poll and post-poll allies to form a government. Policies are framed after a lot of negotiations and compromises among the allies. In this entire process, the Prime Minister has to act more as a negotiator than as leader of the government.
At the State level, a similar parliamentary executive exists, though with some variations. The most important variation is that there is a
Governor of the State appointed by the President (on the advice of
R K Laxman in The Times of India.
READ A CARTOON
This Chief Minster is not happy even after winning the confidence motion! Can you imagine why this is so?
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work the central government). Though the Chief Minister, like the Prime
Minister is the leader of the majority party in the Assembly, the
Governor has more discretionary powers. However, the main principles of parliamentary system operate at the State level too.
Check your progress
Suppose the Prime Minister is to select the Council of
Ministers. What will he/she do?
a. Select those who are experts in the various subjects.
b. Select only those who are from his/her party.
c. Select those who are personally loyal and dependable.
d. Select those who are supporters of the government.
e. Take into account the political weight of the various aspirants and choose from among them.
PERMANENT EXECUTIVE: BUREAUCRACY
Who implements the decisions of the ministers?
The Executive organ of the government includes the Prime
Minister, the ministers and a large organisation called the bureaucracy or the administrative machinery. To underline the difference between this machinery and the military service, it is described as civil service. Trained and skilled officers who work as permanent employees of the government are assigned the task of assisting the ministers in formulating policies and implementing these policies.
In a democracy, the elected representatives and the ministers are in charge of government and the administration is under their control and supervision. In the parliamentary system, the legislature also exercises control over the administration. The administrative officers cannot act in violation of the policies adopted by the legislature. It is the responsibility of the ministers to retain political control over the administration. India has established professional administrative
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 4: Executive machinery. At the same time, this machinery is made politically accountable. The bureaucracy is also expected to be politically neutral. This means that the bureaucracy will not take any political position on policy matters. In a democracy, it is always possible that a party is defeated in elections and the new government wants to opt for new policies in the place of policies of the previous government.
In such a situation, it is the responsibility of the administrative machinery to faithfully and efficiently participate in drafting the policy and in its implementation.
The Indian bureaucracy today is an enormously complex system. It consists of the All-India services, State services, employees of the local governments, and technical and managerial staff running public sector undertakings. Makers of our Constitution were aware of the importance of the non-partisan and professional bureaucracy. They also wanted the members of the civil services or bureaucracy to be impartially selected on the basis of merit. So, the Union Public Service Commission has been entrusted with the task of conducting the process of recruitment of the civil servants for the government of
India. Similar public service commissions are provided for the States also. Members of the Public Service Commissions are appointed for a fixed term. Their removal or suspension is subject to a thorough enquiry made by a judge of the
Supreme Court.
While efficiency and merit are the norms for recruitment, the Constitution also ensures that all sections of the society including the weaker sections have an opportunity to be part of the public bureaucracy. For this purpose, the
Constitution has provided reservation in jobs for Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Subsequently, reservations have also been provided for women, Other Backward
Classes (OBC) and Economically Weaker Sections (EWS).
These provisions ensure that the bureaucracy would be more representative and social inequalities will not come in the way of recruitment to the civil service.
Yes, I know that the officers are there to serve the people.
But people are always afraid of these officers. And officers also behave as if they were the masters!
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
Persons selected by the UPSC for Indian Administrative Service and Indian Police Service constitute the backbone of the higher level bureaucracy in the States. You may know that the collector of a district is the most important officer of the government at the district level.
Do you know that the collector is normally an IAS officer and that the officer is governed by the service conditions laid down by the central government? An IAS or IPS officer is assigned to a particular
State, where he or she works under the supervision of the State government. However, the IAS or IPS officers are appointed by the central government, they can go back into the service of the central government and most importantly, only the central government can take disciplinary action against them. This means that the key administrative officers of the States are under the supervision and control of the central government. Apart from the IAS and the IPS officers appointed by the UPSC, the administration of the State is looked after by officers appointed through the State Public Service
Commissions. As we shall study later in the chapter on federalism, this feature of the bureaucracy strengthens the control of the central government over the administration of the States.
The bureaucracy is an instrument through which welfare policies of the government must reach the people. But most often, it is so powerful that people are afraid of approaching a government officer.
It is a common experience of the people that bureaucracy is insensitive to the demands and expectations of the ordinary citizen.
Only if the democratically elected government controls the bureaucracy, some of these problems can be effectively handled. On the other hand, too much political interference turns the bureaucracy into an instrument in the hands of the politician. Though the
Constitution has created independent machinery for recruitment, many people think that there is no provision for protecting the civil
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 4: Executive servants from political interference in the performance of their duties.
It is also felt that enough provisions are not there to ensure the accountability of the bureaucracy to the citizen. There is an expectation that measures like the Right to Information may make the bureaucracy a little more responsive and accountable.
Conclusion
The modern executive is a very powerful institution of government. The executive enjoys greater powers compared to other organs of the government. This generates a greater need to have democratic control over the executive. The makers of our Constitution thought with foresight that the executive must be put firmly under regular supervision and control. Thus, a parliamentary executive was chosen. Periodic elections, constitutional limits over the exercise of powers and democratic politics have ensured that executive organ cannot become unresponsive.
Exercises
1. A parliamentary executive means:
a. Executive where there is a parliament b. Executive elected by the parliament c. Where the parliament functions as the Executive d. Executive that is dependent on support of the majority in the parliament
2. Read this dialogue. Which argument do you agree with? Why?
Amit: Looking at the constitutional provisions, it seems that the
President is only a rubber stamp.
Shama: The President appoints the Prime Minister. So, he must have the powers to remove the Prime Minister as well.
Rajesh: We don’t need a President. After the election, the
Parliament can meet and elect a leader to be the Prime Minister.
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
3. Match the following i. Works within the particular State in a. Indian Foreign which recruited Service ii. Works in any central government b. State Civil office located either at the national Services capital or elsewhere in the country iii. Works in a particular State to which c. All India Services allotted; can also be sent on deputation to the centre iv. Works in Indian missions abroad d. Central Services
4. Identify the ministry which may have released the following news items. Would this be a ministry of the central government or the
State government? Why?
a. An official release said that in 2004-05 the Tamil Nadu
Textbooks Corporation would release new versions for standards VII, X and XI.
b. A new railway loop line bypassing the crowded Tiruvallur-
Chennai section to help iron ore exporters. The new line, likely to be about 80 km long, will branch off at Puttur and then reach Athipattu near the port.
c. The three-member sub-divisional committee formed to verify suicide by farmers in Ramayampet mandal has found that the two farmers who committed suicide this month have had economic problems due to failure of crops.
5. While appointing the Prime Minister, the President selects a. Leader of the largest party in the Lok Sabha b. Leader of the largest party in the alliance which secures a majority in the Lok Sabha c. The leader of the largest party in the Rajya Sabha d. Leader of the alliance or party that has the support of the majority in Lok Sabha
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 4: Executive
6. Read this discussion and say which of these statements applies most to India.
Alok: Prime Minister is like a king, he decides everything in our country.
Shekhar: Prime Minister is only ‘first among equals’, he does not have any special powers. All ministers and the PM have similar
Bobby: Prime Minister has to consider the expectations of the party members and other supporters of the government. But after all, the Prime Minister has a greater say in policy making and in choosing the ministers.
7. Why do you think is the advice of the Council of Ministers binding on the President? Give your answer in not more than 100 words.
8. The parliamentary system of executive vests many powers in the legislature for controlling the executive. Why, do you think, is it so necessary to control the executive?
9. It is said that there is too much political interference in the working of the administrative machinery. It is suggested that there should be more and more autonomous agencies which do not have to answer to the ministers.
a. Do you think this will make administration more people- friendly?
b. Do you think this will make administration more efficient?
c. Does democracy mean full control of elected representatives over the administration?
10. Write an essay of two hundred words on the proposal to have an elected administration instead of an appointed administration.
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
Chapter Five
LEGISLATURE
INTRODUCTION
You have already studied the importance of elections and the method of election adopted in India. Legislatures are elected by the people and work on behalf of the people. In this chapter you would study how elected legislatures function and help in maintaining democratic government. You will also learn about the composition and functioning of the parliament and State legislatures in India and their importance in democratic government. After reading this chapter you would know
± the importance of the legislature;
± the functions and powers of the Parliament of India;
± the law making procedure;
± how the Parliament controls the executive; and
± how the Parliament regulates itself.
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 5: Legislature
WHY DO WE NEED A PARLIAMENT?
Legislature is not merely a law making body. Lawmaking is but one of the functions of the legislature. It is the centre of all democratic political process. It is packed with action; walkouts, protests, demonstration, unanimity, concern and co-operation. All these serve very vital purposes. Indeed, a genuine democracy is inconceivable without a representative, efficient and effective legislature. The legislature also helps people in holding the representatives accountable. This is indeed, the very basis of representative democracy.
Yet, in most democracies, legislatures are losing central place to the executive. In India too, the Cabinet initiates policies, sets the agenda for governance and carries them through. This has led some critics to remark that the Parliament has declined. But even very strong cabinets must retain majority in the legislature. A strong leader has to face the Parliament and answer to the satisfaction of the
Parliament. Herein lies the democratic potential of the Parliament. It is recognised as one of the most democratic and open forum of debate.
On account of its composition, it is the most representative of all organs of government. It is above all, vested with the power to choose and dismiss the government.
Activity
Consider these newspaper reports and then think:
what would happen if there were no legislatures?
After reading each news report, state how the legislature succeeded or failed in maintaining control over the executive.
l 28th February 2002: The Union Finance
Minister, Jaswant Singh, announced in the
Union budget proposal an increase of Rs. 12 in the price of a 50 kg bag of urea and a smaller increase in the price of two other fertilizers which constituted about 5 per cent rise in prices. The current urea price of Rs. 4,830 a tonne carries a subsidy of as much as 80 per cent.
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
WHY DO WE NEED TWO HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT?
The term ‘Parliament’ refers to the national legislature. The legislature of the States is described as State legislature. The Parliament in India has two houses. When there are two houses of the legislature, it is called a bicameral legislature. The two Houses of the Indian
Parliament are the Council of States or the Rajya Sabha and the
House of the People or the Lok Sabha. The Constitution has given the States the option of establishing either a unicameral or bicameral legislature. At present only si
