Indian Constitution at Work
When a bill is passed by both Houses, it is sent to the President for his assent. The assent of the President results in the enactment of a bill into a law.
Article 109
Special procedure in respect of
Money Bills.—(1)
A Money Bill shall not be introduced in the Council of
Check your progress
± From the discussion of the law making process, do you think that Parliament can devote enough time for thorough discussion of the bills? If not, then what remedies would you suggest to overcome this difficulty?
HOW DOES THE PARLIAMENT CONTROL THE EXECUTIVE?
In a parliamentary democracy, the executive is drawn from the party or a coalition of parties that has a majority in Lok Sabha. It is not difficult for the executive to exercise unlimited and arbitrary powers with the support of the majority party. In such a situation, parliamentary democracy may slip into Cabinet dictatorship, where the Cabinet leads and the House merely follows. Only if the Parliament is active and vigilant, can it keep regular and effective check on the executive. There are many ways in which the Parliament can control the executive. But basic to them all is the power and freedom of the legislators as people’s representatives to work effectively and fearlessly. For instance, no action can be taken against a member for
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 5: Legislature whatever the member may have said in the legislature.
This is known as parliamentary privilege. The presiding officer of the legislature has the final powers in deciding matters of breach of privilege.
The main purpose of such privileges is to enable the members of the legislature to represent the people and exercise effective control over the executive. How does the
Parliament exercise such control? What are the means available at its disposal? Is parliamentary control successful in curbing executive excesses?
Instruments of Parliamentary Control
The legislature in parliamentary system ensures executive accountability at various stages: policy making, implementation of law or policy and during and post- implementation stage. The legislature does this through the use of a variety of devices:
± Deliberation and discussion
± Approval or Refusal of laws
± Financial control
± No confidence motion
Deliberation and discussion: During the law making process, members of the legislature get an opportunity to deliberate on the policy direction of the executive and the ways in which policies are implemented. Apart from deliberating on bills, control may also be exercised during the general discussions in the House. The Question Hour, which is held every day during the sessions of Parliament, where Ministers have to respond to searching questions raised by the members; Zero Hour where members are free to raise any matter that they think is important (though the ministers are not bound to reply), half -an -hour discussion on matters of public importance, adjournment motion, etc., are some instruments of exercising control.
Perhaps the question hour is the most effective method of keeping vigil on the executive and the administrative agencies of the government. Members of Parliament have
With so many sting operations are MPs still free to speak anything anywhere?
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work shown great interest in question hour and maximum attendance is recorded during this time. Most of the questions aim at eliciting information from the government on issues of public interest such as, price rise, availability of food grains, atrocities on weaker sections of the society, riots, black-marketing, etc. This gives the members an opportunity to criticise the government, and represent the problems of their constituencies. The discussions during the question hour are so heated that it is not uncommon to see members raise their voice, walk to the well of the house or walk out in protest to make their point. This results in considerable loss of legislative time. At the same time, we must remember that many of these actions are political techniques to gain concessions from government and in the process force executive accountability.
Approval and ratification of laws: Parliamentary control is also exercised through its power of ratification.
A bill can become a law only with the approval of the
Parliament. A government that has the support of a disciplined majority may not find it difficult to get the approval of the Legislature. Such approvals however, cannot be taken for granted. They are the products of intense bargaining and negotiations amongst the members of ruling party or coalition of parties and even government and opposition. If the government has majority in Lok Sabha but not in the Rajya Sabha, as has happened during the Janata Party rule in 1977 and
N.D.A. rule in 2000, the government will be forced to make substantial concessions to gain the approval of both the
Houses. Many bills, such as the Lok Pal Bill have failed enactment, Prevention of Terrorism bill (2002) was rejected by the Rajya Sabha.
Financial control: As mentioned earlier, financial resources to implement the programmes of the government are granted through the budget. Preparation and presentation of budget for the approval of the legislature is constitutional obligation of the government.
This obligation allows the legislature to exercise control
It must be difficult to be a minister. This is like giving an examination almost every day!
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 5: Legislature over the purse strings of the government. The legislature may refuse to grant resources to the government. This seldom happens because the government ordinarily enjoys support of the majority in the parliamentary system. Nevertheless, before granting money the Lok
Sabha can discuss the reasons for which the government requires money. It can enquire into cases of misuse of funds on the basis of the report of the Comptroller and Auditor General and Public
Accounts committees. But the legislative control is not only aimed at financial propriety. The legislature is concerned about the policies of the government that are reflected in the budget. Through financial control, the legislature controls the policy of the government.
No Confidence Motion: The most powerful weapon that enables the Parliament to ensure executive accountability is the no-confidence motion. As long as the government has the support of its party or coalition of parties that have a majority in the Lok Sabha, the power of the House to dismiss the government is fictional rather than real.
However, after 1989, several governments have been forced to resign due to lack of confidence of the house. Each of these governments lost the confidence of the Lok Sabha because they failed to retain the support of their coalition partners.
Thus, the Parliament can effectively control the executive and ensure a more responsive government. It is however important for this purpose, that there is adequate time at the disposal of the House, the members are interested in discussion and participate effectively and there is willingness to compromise amongst the government and the opposition. In the last two decades, there has been a gradual decline in sessions of the Lok Sabha and State Legislative Assemblies and time spent on debates. Moreover, the Houses of the Parliament have been plagued by absence of quorum, boycott of sessions by members of opposition which deprive the house the power to control the executive through discussion.
Activity
Watch the Dooradarshan telecast of Parliament sessions for three continuous days. Or collect the newspaper reports for three continuous days and make a wallpaper. Take care to observe the issues
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
WH AT D O T H E CO M M I T T E E S O F
PARLIAMENT DO?
A significant feature of the legislative process is the appointment of committees for various legislative purposes. These committees play a vital role not merely in law making, but also in the day-to-day business of the House. Since the Parliament meets only during sessions, it has very limited time at its disposal. The making of law for instance requires in-depth study of the issue under consideration. This in turn demands more attention and time.
Similarly, there are other important functions also, like studying the demands for grants made by various ministries, looking into expenditure incurred by various departments, investigating cases of corruption etc.
Parliamentary committees perform such functions. Since 1983, India has developed a system of parliamentary standing committees.
There are over twenty such departmentally related committees. Standing Committees supervise the work of various departments, their budget, their expenditure and bills that come up in the house relating to the department.
Apart from standing committees, the Joint Parliamentary
Committees have occupied a position of eminence in our country.
Joint Parliamentary Committees (JPCs) can be set up for the purpose of discussing a particular bill, like the joint committee to discuss being discussed, the role of the speaker, questions being asked, the political parties of the representatives, representatives from your region, nature of the issues of discussion – whether they were all of national or regional in character.
READ A CARTOON
Walkout is a frequently adopted measure by the opposition to register their protest against the government. Has there been an overuse of that weapon?
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 5: Legislature bill, or for the purpose of investigating financial irregularities. Members of these committees are selected from both Houses.
The committee system has reduced the burden on the
Parliament. Many important bills have been referred to committees. The Parliament has merely approved the work done in the committees with few occasional alterations.
Of course legally speaking, no bill can become law, and no budget will be sanctioned unless approved by the
Parliament. But the Parliament rarely rejects the suggestions made by the committees.
HOW DOES THE PARLIAMENT REGULATE ITSELF?
Parliament as mentioned earlier is a debating forum. It is through debates that the parliament performs all its vital functions. Such discussions must be meaningful and orderly so that the functions of the Parliament are carried out smoothly and its dignity is intact. The Constitution itself has made certain provisions to ensure smooth conduct of business. The presiding officer of the legislature is the final authority in matters of regulating the business of the legislature.
So, the lawmakers too, are subject to some laws!
“The nature of the legislature is such that there are restrictions only so far as procedure is concerned. But in substance there is no restriction, no limitation on the sovereignty of the legislature or
Parliament…”
N.V. Gadgil, CAD, Vol. XI, p.659, 18 November 1949
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
There is one more way in which the presiding officers control the behaviour of the members. You may have heard about the anti-defection law. Most of the members of the legislatures are elected on the ticket of some political party. What would happen if they decide to leave the party after getting elected? For many years after independence, this issue was unresolved. Finally there was an agreement among the parties that a legislator who is elected on one party’s ticket must be restricted from ‘defecting’ to another party. An amendment to the Constitution was made (52nd amendment act) in 1985. This is known as anti-defection amendment. It has also been subsequently modified by the 91st amendment. The presiding officer of the House is the authority who takes final decisions on all such cases.
If it is proved that a member has ‘defected’, then such
I don’t understand why they change parties. Do they even come back to the party they once
READ A CARTOON
“We are not walking out, we have been ordered out,” said the MPs.
Why do you think such situations occur?
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 5: Legislature member loses the membership of the House. Besides, such a person is also disqualified from holding any political office like ministership, etc.
What is defection? If a member remains absent in the House when asked by the party leadership to remain present or votes against the instructions of the party or voluntarily leaves the membership of the party, it is deemed as defection.
Experience of the past twenty years shows that the anti-defection amendment has not been able to curb defections, but it has given additional powers to the party leadership and the presiding officers of the legislatures over the members.
Conclusion
Have you watched the live telecast of the proceeding of the
Parliament? You will find that our Parliament is truly a rainbow of colourful dresses symbolising different regions of the country.
Members speak different languages in the course of the proceedings. They come from various castes, religions and sects.
They often fight bitterly. Many times an impression is created that they are wasting the time and money of the nation. But we have seen in this chapter that these same parliamentarians can effectively control the executive. They can express the interests of various sections of our society. On account of its composition, Legislature is the most representative of all organs of government. The sheer presence of members of diverse social backgrounds makes the legislatures more representative and potentially more responsive to people’s expectations. In a parliamentary democracy, legislature, as a body representing the wishes of the people occupies a high position of power and responsibility. Herein lies the democratic potential of the
Parliament.
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
Exercises
1. Alok thinks that a country needs an efficient government that looks after the welfare of the people. So, if we simply elected our Prime
Minister and Ministers and left to them the task of government, we will not need a legislature. Do you agree? Give reasons for your
2. A class was debating the merits of a bicameral system. The following points were made during the discussion. Read the arguments and say if you agree or disagree with each of them, giving reasons.
√ Neha said that bicameral legislature does not serve any purpose.
√ Shama argued that experts should be nominated in the second chamber.
√ Tridib said that if a country is not a federation, then there is no need to have a second chamber.
3. Why can the Lok Sabha control the executive more effectively than the Rajya Sabha can?
4. Rather than effective control of the executive, the Lok Sabha is a platform for the expression of popular sentiments and people’s expectations. Do you agree? Give reasons.
5. The following are some proposals for making the Parliament more effective. State if you agree or disagree with each of them and give your reasons. Explain what would be the effect if these suggestions were accepted.
√ Parliament should work for longer period.
√ Attendance should be made compulsory for members of
Parliament.
√ Speakers should be empowered to penalise members for interrupting the proceedings of the House.
6. Arif wanted to know that if ministers propose most of the important bills and if the majority party often gets the government bills passed, what is the role of the Parliament in the law making process? What answer would you give him?
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 5: Legislature
7. Which of the following statements you agree with the most? Give your reasons.
√ Legislators must be free to join any party they want.
√ Anti-defection law has contributed to the domination of the party leaders over the legislators.
√ Defection is always for selfish purposes and therefore, a legislator who wants to join another party must be disqualified from being a minister for the next two years.
8. Dolly and Sudha are debating about the efficiency and effectiveness of the Parliament in recent times. Dolly believed that the decline of
Indian Parliament is evident in the less time spent on debate and discussion and increase in the disturbances of the functioning of the House and walkouts etc. Sudha contends that the fall of different governments on the floor of Lok Sabha is a proof of its vibrancy.
What other arguments can you provide to support or oppose the positions of Dolly and Sudha?
9. Arrange the different stages of passing of a bill into a law in their correct sequence:.
√ A resolution is passed to admit the bill for discussion
√ The bill is referred to the President of India – write what happens next if s/he does not sign it
√ The bill is referred to other House and is passed
√ The bill is passed in the house in which it was proposed
√ The bill is read clause by clause and each is voted upon
√ The bill is referred to the subcommittee – the committee makes some changes and sends it back to the house for discussion
√ The concerned minister proposes the need for a bill
√ Legislative department in ministry of law, drafts a bill
10. How has the system of parliamentary committee affected the overseeing and appraisal of legislation by the Parliament?
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
Chapter Six
JUDICIARY
INTRODUCTION
Many times, courts are seen only as arbitrators in disputes between individuals or private parties. But judiciary performs some political functions also. Judiciary is an important organ of the government. The Supreme Court of India is in fact, one of the very powerful courts in the world. Right from 1950 the judiciary has played an important role in interpreting and in protecting the Constitution. In this chapter you will study the role and importance of the judiciary. In the chapter on fundamental rights you have already read that the judiciary is very important for protecting our rights. After studying this chapter, you would be able to understand
± the meaning of independence of judiciary;
± the role of Indian Judiciary in protecting our rights;
