Indian Constitution at Work in India has to a large extent been influenced by the changing nature of the political process. In the 1950s and early 1960s the foundation of our federalism was laid under Jawaharlal Nehru. It was also a period of Congress dominance over the centre as well as the States. Except on the issue of formation of new States, the relations between the centre and the States remained quite normal during this period. The States were hopeful that they would be making progress with the help of the grants-in-aid from the centre. Besides, there was considerable optimism about the policies of socio-economic development designed by the centre.
In the middle of the 1960s Congress dominance declined somewhat and in a large number of States opposition parties came to power. It resulted in demands for greater powers and greater autonomy to the States. In fact, these demands were a direct fallout of the fact that different parties were ruling at the centre and in many
States. So, the State governments were protesting against what they saw as unnecessary interference in their governments by the Congress government at the centre.
The Congress too, was not very comfortable with the idea of dealing with governments led by opposition parties.
This peculiar political context gave birth to a discussion about the concept of autonomy under a federal system.
Finally, since the 1990s, Congress dominance has largely ended and we have entered an era of coalition politics especially at the centre. In the States too, different parties, both national and regional, have come to power.
This has resulted in a greater say for the States, a respect for diversity and the beginning of a more mature federalism. Thus, it is in the second phase that the issue of autonomy became very potent politically.
Demands for Autonomy
Many States and even many political parties have, from time to time, demanded that States should have more autonomy vis-à-vis the central government. However,
This is quite interesting. So, laws and constitutions alone do not decide everything. After all, actual politics decides the nature of our government!
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 7: Federalism
‘autonomy’ refers to different things for different States and parties.
± Sometimes, these demands expect that the division of powers should be changed in favour of the States and more powers and important powers be assigned to the
States. Many States (Tamil Nadu, Punjab, West Bengal)
and many parties (DMK, Akali Dal, CPI-M) have made demands of autonomy from time to time.
± Another demand is that States should have independent sources of revenue and greater control over the resources.
This is also known as financial autonomy. In 1977, the
Left Front Government in West Bengal brought out a document demanding a restructuring of centre-State relations in India. In the autonomy demands of Tamil
Nadu and Punjab also, there was an implicit support to the idea of greater financial powers.
± The third aspect of the autonomy demands relates to administrative powers of the States. States resent the control of the centre over the administrative machinery.
± Fourthly, autonomy demands may also be related to cultural and linguistic issues. The opposition to the domination of Hindi (in
Tamil Nadu) or demand for advancing the Punjabi language and culture are instances of this. Some
States also feel that there is a domination of the
Hindi-speaking areas over the others. In fact, during the decade of
1960s, there were agitations in some States against the imposition of the Hindi language.
Yes, I know that Hindi is
India’s official language. But many of my friends from different parts of the country don’t know Hindi.
During discussion on the national language in the
Constituent Assembly, Nehru had to appeal to the Hindi- speaking provinces to show greater tolerance towards others. Don’t spare me Shankar, p.24
READ A CARTOON
Shankar. Copyright: Children’s Book Trust.
18 September 1949
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
Role of Governors and President’s Rule
The role of Governors has always been a controversial issue between the States and the central government. The Governor is not an elected office-holder. Many Governors have been retired military officers or civil servants or politicians. Besides, the Governor is appointed by the central government and therefore, actions of the Governor are often viewed as interference by the Central government in the functioning of the State government. When two different parties are in power at the centre and the State, the role of the Governor becomes even more controversial. The Sarkaria Commission that was appointed by the central government (1983; it submitted its report in 1988) to examine the issues relating to centre-State relations, recommended that appointments of Governors should be strictly non-partisan.
Powers and role of the Governor become controversial for one more reason. One of the most controversial articles in the Constitution is Article 356, which provides for President’s rule in any State. This provision is to be applied, when ‘a situation has arisen in which the Government of the
State cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of this
Constitution.’ It results in the takeover of the State government by the Union government. The President’s proclamation has to be ratified by Parliament. President’s rule can be extended till three years. The
Governor has the power to recommend the dismissal of the State government and suspension or dissolution of State assembly. This has led to many conflicts. In some cases, State governments were dismissed even when they had a majority in the legislature, as had happened in Kerala in 1959 or without testing their majority, as happened in several other States after 1967. Some cases went to the
Supreme Court and the Court has ruled that constitutional validity of the decision to impose President’s rule can be examined by the judiciary.
READ A CARTOON
“When Nehru was appointing governors, some were reluctant to quit ministerial chairs.”
Don’t spare me Shankar, p.89
Shankar. Copyright: Children’s Book Trust.
27 April 1952
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 7: Federalism
Article 356 was very sparingly used till 1967. After
1967 many States had non-
Congress governments and the
Congress was in power at the centre. The centre has often used this provision to dismiss
State governments or has used the office of the Governor to prevent the majority party or coalition from assuming office.
For instance, the central government removed elected governments in Andhra
Pradesh and Jammu and
Kashmir in the decade of 1980s.
Demands for New States
The other dimension of tension in our federal system has been the demand to create new
States. The national movement not only created a pan-Indian national unity; it also generated distinct unity around a common language, region and culture. Our national movement was also a movement for democracy.
Therefore, in the course of the national movement itself, it was decided that as far as possible,
States would be created on the basis of common cultural and linguistic identity.
This ultimately led to the demand for the creation of
READ A CARTOON
Toppling the State governments.
Everyone loves to play this game!
READ A CARTOON
Flood of demands for creating new States
Shankar. Copyright: Children’s Book Trust.
R K Laxman in The Times of India.
26 July 1953
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work linguistic States after Independence. In December 1953, the States Reorganisation Commission was set up and it recommended the creation of linguistic States, at least for the major linguistic groups. In 1956, reorganisation of some States took place. This saw the beginning of the creation of linguistic States and the process is still continuing. Gujarat and Maharashtra were created in
1960; Punjab and Haryana were separated from each other in 1966. Later, the North Eastern region was reorganised and new States like Manipur, Tripura, Meghalaya,
Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh were created.
Activity
Make a list of the States of India and find out the year in which each of the States was created.
In 2000, some of the larger States were further divided both to meet the demands for a separate State as well as to meet the need for greater administrative efficiency. Thus
Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar were divided to create three new States. They are: Chhattisgarh,
Uttarakhand and Jharkhand respectively. In 2014, the
State of Telangana was formed by dividing Andhra
Pradesh. Some regions and linguistic groups are still struggling for separate Statehood like Vidarbha in
Maharashtra.
Interstate Conflicts
While the States keep fighting with the centre over autonomy and other issues like the share in revenue resources, there have been many instances of disputes between two States or among more than two States. It is true that the judiciary acts as the arbitration mechanism on disputes of a legal nature but these disputes are in reality not just legal. They have political implications and therefore they can best be resolved only through negotiations and mutual understanding.
So, federalism is all about conflicts! First, we talked about
Centre-State conflicts and now conflict among States. Can’t we live together peacefully?
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 7: Federalism
Broadly, two types of disputes keep recurring. One is the border dispute. States have certain claims over territories belonging to neighbouring States. Though language is the basis of defining boundaries of the States, often border areas would have populations speaking more than one language. So, it is not easy to resolve this dispute merely on the basis of linguistic majority. One of the long- standing border disputes is the dispute between
Maharashtra and Karnataka over the city of Belgaum.
Manipur and Nagaland too, have a long-standing border dispute. The carving out of Haryana from the erstwhile
State of Punjab has led to dispute between the two States not only over border areas, but over the capital city of
Chandigarh. This city today houses the capital of both these States. In 1985, the then Prime Minister Rajiv
Gandhi reached an understanding with the leadership of
Punjab. According to this understanding, Chandigarh was to be handed over to Punjab. But this has not happened yet.
While border disputes are more about sentiment, the disputes over the sharing of river waters are even more serious, because they are related to problems of drinking water and agriculture in the concerned States. You might have heard about the ‘Kaveri’ water dispute. This is a major issue between Tamil Nadu and Karnataka. Farmers in both the States are dependent on Cauvery waters.
Though there is a river water tribunal to settle water disputes, this dispute has reached the Supreme Court.
In another similar dispute Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh and
Maharashtra are battling over sharing the waters of
Narmada river. Rivers are a major resource and therefore, disputes over river waters test the patience and cooperative spirit of the States.
Activity Activity Activity Activity Activity
Collect information about at least one dispute about river waters involving two or more States.
Yes, conflict over Governors, over language, over borders and over water….and yet we manage to live together!
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
The most extra-ordinary feature of the federal arrangement created in India is that many States get a differential treatment. We have already noted in the chapter on
Legislature that the size and population of each State being different, an asymmetrical representation is provided in the Rajya Sabha. While ensuring minimum representation to each of the smaller States, this arrangement also ensures that larger States would get more representation.
In the case of division of powers, too, the Constitution provides a division of powers that is common to all the
States. And yet, the Constitution has some special provisions for some States given their peculiar social and historical circumstances. Most of the special provisions pertain to the north eastern States (Assam, Nagaland,
Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, etc.) largely due to their sizeable indigenous tribal population with a distinct history and culture. However, these provisions have not been able to stem alienation and the insurgency in parts of the region. Special provisions also exist for hilly States like Himachal Pradesh and some other States like Andhra
Pradesh, Goa, Gujarat, Maharashtra Sikkim and
Telangana.
Jammu and Kashmir
The other State which had a special status was Jammu and Kashmir (J&K) (Art. 370). Jammu and Kashmir was one of the large princely States, which had the option of joining India or Pakistan or remaining independent.
Check your progress
± Why do States want more autonomy?
± What is the difference between autonomy and secession?
I now understand what they m e a n t b y ‘ i n t e l l i g e n t a n d balanced design’ in the first chapter.
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 7: Federalism
However, immediately after independence in October, 1947 Pakistan sent tribal infiltrators from its side to capture Kashmir. This forced the Maharaja Hari Singh to ask for Indian help and acceded to the
Indian Union.
Many of the Muslim majority areas in the Western and Eastern parts joined Pakistan but J&K was an exception. Under these circumstances, it was given much greater autonomy by the
Constitution. According to Article 370, the concurrence of the State was required for making any laws in matters mentioned in the Union and Concurrent lists. This was different from the position of other states. In the case of the other States, the division of powers as listed through three lists automatically applies. In the case of Jammu and
Kashmir, the central government had only limited powers and other powers listed in the Union list and Concurrent list could be used only with the consent of the State government. This gave greater autonomy to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
Earlier, there was a constitutional provision that allowed the
President, with the concurrence of the State government, to specify which parts of the Union list should apply to the State. The President had issued two Constitutional orders in concurrence with the government of J&K making large parts of the Constitution applicable to the State. As a result, though J&K had a separate constitution and a flag, the Parliament’s power to make laws on subjects in the
Union List was fully accepted.
The remaining difference between the other States and the State of J&K were that no emergency due to internal disturbances could be declared in J&K without the concurrence of the State. The Union government could not impose a financial emergency in the State and the Directive Principles did not apply in J&K. Amendments to the
Indian Constitution (under Art. 368) could apply in concurrence with the government of J&K.
At present, the special status given under 370 no longer exists.
By the Jammu and Kashmir reorganisation Act 2019, the State has been bifurcated into two Union Territories viz., (i) Jammu and
Kashmir and (ii) Ladakh. The new arrangement has come into effect from 31 October, 2019.
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
Conclusion
Federalism is like a rainbow, where each colour is separate, yet together they make a harmonious pattern. Federalism has to continuously maintain a difficult balance between the centre and the States. No legal or institutional formula can guarantee the smooth functioning of a federal polity. Ultimately, the people and the political process must develop a culture and a set of values and virtues like mutual trust, toleration and a spirit of cooperation. Federalism celebrates both unity as well as diversity. National unity cannot be built by streamlining differences. Such forced unity only generates greater social strife and alienation and tends finally to destroy unity. A responsive polity sensitive to diversities and to the demands for autonomy can alone be the basis of a cooperative federation.
Exercises
1. From the list of following events which ones would you identify with the functioning of federalism? Why?
√ The Centre on Tuesday announced Sixth Schedule status to
GNLF-led Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council, which would ensure greater autonomy to the governing body in the Hill district of
West Bengal. A tripartite Memorandum of Settlement was signed in New Delhi between the Centre, West Bengal government and the Subhas Ghising-led Gorkha National
Liberation Front (GNLF) after two days of hectic deliberations.
√ Government for action plan for rain-hit States: Centre has asked the rain-ravaged States to submit detailed plans for reconstruction to enable it to respond to their demands for extra relief expeditiously.
√ New Commissioner for Delhi: The Capital is getting a new municipal commissioner. Confirming this, present MCD
Commissioner Rakesh Mehta said he has received his transfer orders and that he is likely to be replaced by IAS officer Ashok
Kumar, who is serving as the Chief Secretary in Arunachal
Pradesh. Mehta, a 1975 batch IAS officer, has been heading the MCD for about three-and-a-half years.
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 7: Federalism
√ CU Status for Manipur University: Rajya Sabha on Wednesday passed a Bill to convert the Manipur University into a Central
University with the Human Resource Development Minister promising such institutions in the North Eastern States of
Arunachal Pradesh, Tripura and Sikkim as well.
√ Funds released: The Centre has released Rs. 553 lakh to
Arunachal Pradesh under its rural water supply scheme. The first instalment was of Rs. 466.81 lakh.
√ We’ll teach the Biharis how to live in Mumbai: Around 100 Shiv
Sainiks stormed J. J. Hospital, disrupted daily operations, raised slogans and threatened to take matters into their own hands if no action was taken against non-Maharashtrian students
