Indian Constitution at Work
We also have more than 30 women Mayors in Corporations, over
500 women Adhyakshas of Town Municipalities and nearly 650 Nagar
Panchayats headed by women. Women have gained more power and confidence by asserting control over resources. Their presence in these institutions has given many women a greater understanding of the working of politics. In many cases, they have brought a new perspective and a greater sensitivity to discussions at local bodies.
In many cases, women were unable to assert their presence or were mere proxies for the male members of their family who sponsored their election. Such instances, however are becoming fewer.
While reservations for Scheduled Castes and Tribes are mandated by the constitutional amendment, most States have also made a provision to reserve seats for Backward Castes. As the Indian population has 16.2 per cent Scheduled Castes and 8.2 per cent
Scheduled Tribes, about 6.6 lakh elected members in the urban and local bodies hail from these two communities. This has
READ AN IMAGE
Look at this photograph. The local Sarkar is sitting out in the sun. Is there any other feature that strikes you?
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 8: Local Governments significantly altered the social profile of local bodies. These bodies have thus become more representative of the social reality they operate within. Sometimes this leads to tensions. The dominant social groups which controlled the village earlier do not wish to give up their power. This leads to intensification of struggle for power. But tension and struggle is not always bad. Whenever there is an attempt to make democracy more meaningful and give power to those who did not enjoy it earlier, there is bound to be some conflict and tension in society.
The Constitutional amendments assigned as many as
29 subjects to the local governments. All these subjects are related to functions linked to local welfare and development needs. The experience with the functioning of local government in the past decade has shown that local governments in India enjoy limited autonomy to perform the functions assigned to them. Many States have not transferred most of the subjects to the local bodies.
This means that the local bodies cannot really function in an effective manner. Therefore, the entire exercise of electing so many representatives becomes somewhat symbolic. Some people criticise the formation of the local bodies because this has not changed the way in which decisions are taken at the central and the State level. People at the local level do not enjoy much powers of choosing welfare programmes or allocation of resources.
So, the law is good but it is mostly on paper. Is this what they call the gap between theory and practice?
Bolivia is frequently cited as one of the most successful cases of democratic decentralisation in Latin America. In 1994, the
Popular Participation Law decentralised power to the local level, allowing for the popular election of mayors, dividing the country into municipalities, and crafting a system of automatic fiscal transfers to the new municipalities. Bolivia is divided into 314 municipal governments. These governments in Bolivia are headed by popularly-elected mayors (presidente municipal) and a municipal council (cabildo). Local elections occur nationwide every five years.
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
Local bodies have very little funds of their own. The dependence of local bodies on the State and central governments for financial support has greatly eroded their capacity to operate effectively. While rural local bodies raise 0.24% of the total revenues collected, they account for 4% of the total expenditure made by the government. So they earn much less than they spend. That makes them dependent on those who give them grants.
Conclusion
This experience suggests that local governments continue to be agencies implementing the welfare and development schemes of the central and State government. Giving more power to local government means that we should be prepared for real decentralisation of power. Ultimately, democracy means that power should be shared by the people; people in the villages and urban localities must have the power to decide what policies and programmes they want to adopt. As you have studied earlier, democracy means decentralisation of power and giving more and more power to the people. The laws about local governments are an important step in the direction of democratisation. But the true test of democracy is not merely in the legal provisions but in the practice of those provisions.
Bolivian local governments have been entrusted with building local health and education facilities, as well as maintenance of this infrastructure. In Bolivia, 20% of nationwide tax collections are distributed among municipalities on a per capita basis.
While these municipalities may levy taxes on motor vehicles, urban property, and large agricultural properties, fiscal transfers provide the bulk of the operating budget for these
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 8: Local Governments
Exercises
1. Constitution of India visualised village panchayats as units of self- government. Think over the situation described in the following statements and explain how do these situations strengthen or weaken the panchayats in becoming units of self-government.
a. Government of a State has allowed a big company to establish a huge steel plant. Many villages would be adversely affected by the steel plant. Gram Sabha of one of the affected villages passed a resolution that before establishing any big industries in the region, village people must be consulted and their grievances should be redressed.
b. The government has decided that 20 % of all its expenditure would be done through the panchayats.
c. A village panchayat kept on demanding funds for a building for village school, the government officials turned down their proposal saying that funds are allocated for certain other schemes and cannot be spent otherwise.
d. The government divided a village Dungarpur into two and made a part of village Jamuna and Sohana. Now village Dungarpur has ceased to exist in government’s books.
e. A village panchayat observed that water sources of their region are depleting fast. They decided to mobilise village youth to do some voluntary work and revive the old village ponds and wells.
2. Suppose you are entrusted to evolve a local government plan of a
State, what powers would you endow to the village panchayats to function as units of self-government? Mention any five powers and the justification in two lines for each of them for giving those powers.
3. What are the provisions for the reservations for the socially disadvantaged groups as per the 73rd amendment? Explain how these provisions have changed the profile of the leadership at the village level.
4. What were the main differences between the local governments before 73rd amendment and after that amendment?
5. Read the following conversation. Write in two hundred words your opinion about the issues raised in this conversation.
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
Alok: Our Constitution guarantees equality between men and women. Reservations in local bodies for women ensure their equal share in power.
Neha: But it is not enough that women should be in positions of power. It is necessary that the budget of local bodies should have separate provision for women.
Jayesh: I don’t like this reservations business. A local body must take care of all people in the village and that would automatically take care of women and their interests.
6. Read the provisions of the 73rd Amendment. Which of the following concerns does this amendment address?
a. Fear of replacement makes representatives accountable to the b. The dominant castes and feudal landlords dominate the local c. Rural illiteracy is very high. Illiterate people cannot take decisions about the development of the village.
d. To be effective the village panchayats need resources and powers to make plans for the village development.
7. The following are different justifications given in favour of local government. Give them ranking and explain why you attach greater significance to a particular rationale than the others. According to you, on which of these rationales the decision of the Gram panchayat of Vengaivasal village was based? How?
a. Government can complete the projects with lesser cost with the involvement of the local community.
b. The development plans made by the local people will have greater acceptability than those made by the government officers.
c. People know their area, needs problems and priorities. By collective participation they should discuss and take decisions about their life.
d. It is difficult for the common people to contact their representatives of the State or the national legislature.
8. Which of the following according to you involve decentralisation?
Why are other options not sufficient for decentralisation?
a. To hold election of the Gram Panchayat.
b. Decision by the villagers themselves about what policies and programmes are useful for the village.
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 8: Local Governments c. Power to call meeting of Gram Sabha.
d. A Gram Panchayat receiving the report from the Block
Development Officer about the progress of a project started by the State government.
9. A student of Delhi University, Raghavendra Parpanna, wanted to study the role of decentralisation in decision making about primary education. He asked some questions to the villagers. These questions are given below. If you were among those villagers, what answer would you give to each of these questions?
A meeting of the Gram Sabha is to be called to discuss what steps should be taken to ensure that every child of the village goes to the school.
a. How would you decide the suitable day for the meeting? Think who would be able to attend / not attend the meeting because of your choice.
(i) A day specified by the BDO or the collector (ii) Day of the village haat (iii) Sunday (iv) Naag panchami / sankranti b. What is a suitable venue for the meeting? Why?
(i) Venue suggested by the circular of the district collector.
(ii) Religious place in the village.
(iii) Dalit Mohalla.
(iv) Upper caste Tola (v) Village school c. In the Gram Sabha meeting firstly a circular sent by the district collector was read. It suggested what steps should be taken to organise an education rally and what should be its route. The meeting did not discuss about the children who never come to school or about girls’ education, or the condition of the school building and the timing of the school. No women teacher attended the meeting as it was held on Sunday.
What do you think about these proceedings as an instance of people’s participation?
d. Imagine your class as the Gram Sabha. Discuss the agenda of the meeting and suggest some steps to realise the goal.
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
Chapter Nine
CONSTITUTION AS A
LIVING DOCUMENT
INTRODUCTION
In this chapter, you will see how the Constitution has worked in the last
69 years and how India has managed to be governed by the same Constitution.
After studying this chapter you will find out that:
± the Indian Constitution can be amended according to the needs of the time;
± though many such amendments have already taken place, the Constitution has remained intact and its basic premises have not changed;
± the judiciary has played an important role in protecting the Constitution and also in interpreting the Constitution; and
± the Constitution is a document that keeps evolving and responding to changing situations.
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document
ARE CONSTITUTIONS STATIC?
It is not uncommon for nations to rewrite their constitutions in response to changed circumstances or change of ideas within the society or even due to political upheavals. The Soviet Union had four constitutions in its life of 74 years (1918,
1924, 1936 and 1977). In 1991, the rule of the Communist Party of Soviet Union came to an end and soon the Soviet federation disintegrated. After this political upheaval, the newly formed Russian federation adopted a new constitution in
But look at India. The Constitution of
India was adopted on 26 November 1949.
Its implementation formally started from 26 January 1950. More than
69 years after that, the same constitution continues to function as the framework within which the government of our country operates.
Is it that our Constitution is so good that it needs no change? Was it that our
Constitution makers were so farsighted and wise that they had foreseen all the changes that would take place in the future? In some sense both the answers are correct. It is true that we have inherited a very robust Constitution. The basic framework of the Constitution is very much suited to our country. It is also true that the Constitution makers were very farsighted and provided for many solutions for future situations. But no constitution can provide for all eventualities. No document can be such that it needs no change.
France had numerous constitutions in the last two centuries. After the revolution and during the
Napoleonic period, France underwent continuous experimentation about a constitution: The post- revolution constitution of
1793 is called the period of the first
French republic. Then commenced the second
French republic in 1848.
The third French republic was formed with a new constitution in 1875. In
1946, with a new constitution, the fourth
French republic came into being. Finally, in 1958, the fifth French republic came into being with yet another constitution.
I t s e e m s t o m e t h a t constitutional changes are very c l o s e l y l i n k e d t o p o l i t i c a l developments.
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
Then how does the same Constitution continue to serve the country? One of the answers to such questions is that our Constitution accepts the necessity of modifications according to changing needs of the society.
Secondly, in the actual working of the Constitution, there has been enough flexibility of interpretations. Both political practice and judicial rulings have shown maturity and flexibility in implementing the Constitution. These factors have made our Constitution a living document rather than a closed and static rulebook.
In any society, those responsible for drafting the constitution at a particular time would face one common challenge: the provisions of the constitution would naturally reflect efforts to tackle the problems that the society is facing at the time of making of the constitution.
At the same time, the constitution must be a document that provides the framework of the government for the future as well. Therefore, the constitution has to be able to respond to the challenges that may arise in the future.
In this sense, the constitution will always have something that is contemporary and something that has a more durable importance.
At the same time, a constitution is not a frozen and unalterable document. It is a document made by human beings and may need revisions, changes and re- examination. It is true that the constitution reflects the dreams and aspirations of the concerned society. It must also be kept in mind that the constitution is a framework for the democratic governance of the society. In this sense, it is an instrument that societies create for themselves.
This dual role of the constitution always leads to difficult questions about the status of the constitution: is it so sacred that nobody ever can change it? Alternatively, is it so ordinary an instrument that it can be modified just like any other ordinary law?
The makers of the Indian Constitution were aware of this problem and sought to strike a balance. They placed the Constitution above ordinary law and expected that
I know that the Constitution of the US came into existence more than 200 years ago and so far it has been amended only 27 times!
Isn’t that very interesting?
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document the future generations will respect this document. At the same time, they recognised that in the future, this document may require modifications. Even at the time of writing the Constitution, they were aware that on many matters there were differences of opinion.
Whenever society would veer toward any particular opinion, a change in the constitutional provisions would be required. Thus, the Indian
Constitution is a combination of both the approaches mentioned above: that the constitution is a sacred document and that it is an instrument that may require changes from time to time. In other words, our Constitution is not a static document, it is not the final word about everything; it is not unalterable.
Check your progress
After reading the section above, a number of students in the class were confused. They made the following statements. What would you say about each of these statements?
± The Constitution is like any other law. It simply tells us what are the rules and regulations governing the government.
± The Constitution is the expression of the will of the people, so there must be a provision to change the Constitution after every ten or fifteen years.
± The Constitution is a statement of the philosophy of the country. It can never be changed.
± The Constitution is a sacred document.
Therefore any talk of changing it is against democracy.
HOW TO AMEND THE CONSTITUTION?
Article 368:
…Parliament may in exercise of its constituent power amend by way of addition, variation or repeal any provision of this
Constitution in accordance with the procedure laid down in this article.
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
We have already seen that the makers of our
Constitution wanted to strike a balance. The Constitution must be amended if so required. But it must be protected from unnecessary and frequent changes. In other words, they wanted the Const
