Indian Constitution at Work as attempts by the ruling party to subvert the
Constitution. In particular, the 38th, 39th and 42nd amendments have been the most controversial amendments so far. These three amendments were made in the background of internal emergency declared in the country from June 1975. They sought to make basic changes in many crucial parts of the Constitution.
The 42nd amendment was particularly seen as a wide- ranging amendment affecting large parts of the
Constitution. It was also an attempt to override the ruling of the Supreme Court given in the Kesavananda case. Even the duration of the Lok Sabha was extended from five to six years. In the chapter on Rights, you have read about
Fundamental Duties. They were included in the
Constitution by this amendment act. The 42nd amendment also put restrictions on the review powers of the Judiciary.
It was said at that time that this amendment was practically a rewriting of many parts of the original
Constitution. Do you know that this amendment made changes to the Preamble, to the seventh schedule of the
Constitution and to 53 articles of the Constitution? Many
MPs belonging to the opposition parties were in jail when this amendment was passed in Parliament. In this backdrop, elections were held in 1977 and the ruling party (Congress) was defeated. The new government thought it necessary to reconsider these controversial amendments and through the 43rd and 44th amendments, cancelled most of the changes that were effected by the
38th, 39th and the 42nd amendments. The constitutional balance was restored by these amendments.
Activity
Find out the amendments about the right to education (RTE) and the
Goods and Services Tax (GST). What do you think is the importance of these amendments?
So, it is all about politics!
Didn’t I say that this entire thing about constitutions and amendments is linked to politics rather than law?
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document
BASIC STRUCTURE AND EVOLUTION OF THE
CONSTITUTION
One thing that has had a long lasting effect on the evolution of the Indian Constitution is the theory of the basic structure of the Constitution. You know already that the Judiciary advanced this theory in the famous case of
Kesavananda Bharati. This ruling has contributed to the evolution of the Constitution in the following ways:
± It has set specific limits to Parliament’s power to amend the Constitution. It says that no amendment can violate the basic structure of the Constitution;
± It allows Parliament to amend any and all parts of the
Constitution (within this limitation); and
± It places the Judiciary as the final authority in deciding if an amendment violates basic structure and what constitutes the basic structure.
The Supreme Court gave the Kesavananda ruling in
1973. In the past four decades, this decision has governed all interpretations of the Constitution and all institutions in the country have accepted the theory of basic structure.
In fact, the theory of basic structure is itself an example of a living constitution. There is no mention of this theory in the Constitution. It has emerged from judicial interpretation. Thus, the Judiciary and its interpretation have practically amended the Constitution without a formal amendment.
All living documents evolve in this manner through debates, arguments, competition and practical politics.
Since 1973, the Court has, in many cases, elaborated upon this theory of basic structure and given instances of what constitutes the basic structure of the Constitution of India. In a sense, the basic structure doctrine has further consolidated the balance between rigidity and flexibility: by saying that certain parts cannot be amended, it has underlined the rigid nature while by allowing amendments to all others it has underlined the flexible nature of the amending process.
Ah! So it is the judiciary that has the final word! Is this also judicial activism?
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
There are many other examples of how judicial interpretation changed our understanding of the
Constitution. In many decisions the Supreme Court had held that reservations in jobs and educational institutions cannot exceed fifty per cent of the total seats. This has now become an accepted principle. Similarly, in the case involving reservations for other backward classes, the
Supreme Court introduced the idea of creamy layer and ruled that persons belonging to this category were not entitled to benefits under reservations. In the same manner, the Judiciary has contributed to an informal amendment by interpreting various provisions concerning right to education, right to life and liberty and the right to form and manage minority educational institutions. These are instances of how rulings by the Court contribute to the evolution of the Constitution.
Review of the Constitution
In the late nineties, efforts were made to review the entire Constitution. In the year
2000 a commission to review the working of the Constitution was appointed by the
Government of India under the chairmanship of a retired Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court, Justice Venkatachaliah. Opposition parties and many other organisations boycotted the commission. While a lot of political controversy surrounded this commission, the commission stuck to the theory of basic structure and did not suggest any measures that would endanger the basic structure of the Constitution. This shows the significance of the basic structure doctrine in our constitutional practice.
It’s all wrong. First they say that an amendment requires consensus and now we see that Judges change the whole meaning of the Constitution.
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document
CONSTITUTION AS A LIVING DOCUMENT
We have described our Constitution as a living document. What does that mean?
Almost like a living being, this document keeps responding to the situations and circumstances arising from time to time. Like a living being, the Constitution responds to experience. In fact that is the answer to the riddle we mentioned at the beginning about the durability of the Constitution. Even after so many changes in the society, the Constitution continues to work effectively because of this ability to be dynamic, to be open to interpretations and the ability to respond to the changing situation. This is a hallmark of a democratic constitution. In a democracy, practices and ideas keep evolving over time and the society engages in experiments according to these. A constitution, which protects democracy and yet allows for evolution of new practices becomes not only durable but also the object of respect from the citizens. The important point is: has the Constitution been able to protect itself and protect democracy?
In the past six decades, some very critical situations arose in the politics and constitutional development of the country. We have made a brief reference to some of these in this chapter already. In terms of constitutional-legal issues, the most serious question that came up
Check your progress
State whether the following statements are correct
± After the Basic Structure ruling, Parliament does not have power to amend the Constitution.
± The Supreme Court has given a clear list of the basic features of our Constitution, which cannot be amended.
± Judiciary has the power to decide whether an amendment violates basic structure or not.
± The Kesavananda Bharati ruling has set clear limits on Parliament’s power to amend the
Constitution.
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work again and again from 1950 was about the supremacy of the Parliament. In a parliamentary democracy, the
Parliament represents the people and therefore, it is expected to have an upper hand over both Executive and
Judiciary. At the same time, there is the text of the
Constitution and it has given powers to other organs of the government. Therefore, the supremacy of the
Parliament has to operate within this framework.
Democracy is not only about votes and people’s representation. It is also about the principle of rule of law.
Democracy is also about developing institutions and working through these institutions. All the political institutions must be responsible to the people and maintain a balance with each other.
Contribution of the Judiciary
During the controversy between the Judiciary and the
Parliament, the Parliament thought that it had the power and responsibility to make laws (and amendments) for furthering the interests of the poor, backward and the needy. The Judiciary insisted that all this has to take place within the framework provided by the Constitution and pro-people measures should not bypass legal procedures, because, once you bypass laws even with good intentions, that can give an excuse to the power holders to use their power arbitrarily. And democracy is as much about checks on arbitrary use of power as it is about the well-being of the people.
The success of the working of the Indian Constitution lies in resolving these tensions. The Judiciary, in its famous Kesavananda ruling found a way out of the existing complications by turning to the spirit of the
Constitution rather than its letter. If you read the
Constitution, you will not find any mention of the ‘basic structure’ of the Constitution. Nowhere does the
Constitution say that such and such are part of the basic structure. In this sense, the ‘basic structure’ theory is the
I get it! It’s like a see-saw. Or is it a game of tug of war?
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document invention of the Judiciary. How did it invent such a non- existent thing? And how is it that all other institutions have accepted this during the past four decades?
Therein lies the distinction between letter and spirit.
The Court came to the conclusion that in reading a text or document, we must respect the intent behind that document. A mere text of the law is less important than the social circumstances and aspirations that have produced that law or document. The Court was looking at the basic structure as something without which the
Constitution cannot be imagined at all. This is an instance of trying to balance the letter and the spirit of the
Constitution.
Maturity of the Political Leadership
Our discussion of the role of Judiciary, in the paragraph above, brings out one more fact. In the background of the fierce controversy that raged between 1967 and 1973,
Parliament and the Executive also realised that a balanced and long term view was necessary. After the Supreme Court gave the ruling in the Kesavananda case some attempts were made to ask the Court to reconsider its ruling. When these failed, the 42nd amendment was made and parliamentary supremacy was asserted. But the Court again repeated its earlier stand in the Minerva Mills case (1980). Therefore, even four decades after the ruling in the Kesavananda case, this ruling has dominated our interpretation of the Constitution. Political parties, political leaders, the government, and Parliament, accepted the idea of inviolable basic structure. Even when there was talk about ‘review’ of the Constitution, that exercise could not cross the limits set by the theory of the basic structure.
When the Constitution was made, leaders and people of our country shared a common vision of India. In
Nehru’s famous speech at the time of independence, this vision was described as a tryst with destiny. In the
Constituent Assembly also, all the leaders mentioned this vision: dignity and freedom of the individual, social and
Let us not ignore that there are many instances of political immaturity as well.
Does one have to list these?
Of course, if there are no rights and no elections, the
Constitution won’t make much sense. And if there is no well being, elections and rights won’t make sense. Is this how we understand the ‘spirit’ of our Constitution?
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work economic equality, well-being of all people, unity based on national integrity. This vision has not disappeared. People and leaders alike hold to the vision and hope to realize it. Therefore, the Constitution, based on this vision, has remained an object of respect and authority even after half a century. The basic values governing our public imagination remain intact.
Conclusion
There can still be debates about what constitutes basic structure.
There is nothing wrong in such debates. We must remember that politics in a democracy is necessarily full of debates and differences. That is a sign of diversity, liveliness and openness.
Democracy welcomes debates. At the same time, our political parties and leadership have shown maturity in setting limits to these debates. Because, politics is also about compromises and give-and-take. Extreme positions may be theoretically very correct and ideologically very attractive, but politics demands that everyone is prepared to moderate their extreme views, sharp positions and reach a common minimum ground. Only then democratic politics becomes possible. Politicians and the people of India have understood and practised these skills. That has made the experience of working of the democratic Constitution quite successful. Among the different organs of the government, there will always be competition over which one is more important than the others. They will also always fight over what constitutes
Even within the Constituent Assembly, there were some members who felt that this Constitution was not suited to the Indian situation:
“The ideals on which this draft constitution is framed have no manifest relation to the fundamental spirit of India.
…this Constitution …would not prove suitable and would break down soon after being brought into operation.”
Lakshminarayan Sahu, CAD, Vol. XI, p. 613, 17 November 1949
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document the welfare of the people. But in the last instance, the final authority lies with the people. People, their freedoms and their well-being constitute the purpose of democracy and also the outcome of democratic politics.
Exercises
1. Choose the correct statement from the following.
A constitution needs to be amended from time to time because,
√ Circumstances change and require suitable changes in the constitution.
√ A document written at one point of time becomes outdated after some time.
√ Every generation should have a constitution of its own liking.
√ It must reflect the philosophy of the existing government.
2. Write True / False against the following statements.
a. The President cannot send back an amendment bill for reconsideration of Parliament.
b. Elected representatives alone have the power to amend the
Constitution.
c. The Judiciary cannot initiate the process of constitutional amendment but can effectively change the Constitution by interpreting it differently.
d. Parliament can amend any section of the Constitution.
3. Which of the following are involved in the amendment of the Indian
Constitution? In what way are they involved?
a. Voters b. President of India c. State Legislatures d. Parliament e. Governors f. Judiciary
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
4. You have read in this chapter that the 42nd amendment was one of the most controversial amendments so far. Which of the following were the reasons for this controversy?
a. It was made during national emergency, and the declaration of that emergency was itself controversial.
b. It was made without the support of special majority.
c. It was made without ratification by State legislatures.
d. It contained provisions, which were controversial.
5. Which of the following is not a reasonable explanation of the conflict between the legislature and the judiciary over different amendments?
a. Different interpretations of the Constitution are possible.
b. In a democracy, debates and differences are natural.
c. Constitution has given higher importance to certain rules and principles and also allowed for amendment by special majority.
d. Legislature cannot be entrusted to protect the rights of the citizens.
e. Judiciary can only decide the constitutionality of a particular law; cannot resolve political debates about its need.
6. Identify the correct statements about the theory of basic structure.
Correct the incorrect statements.
a. Constitution specifies the basic tenets.
b. Legislature can amend all parts of the Constitution except the basic structure.
c. Judiciary has defined which aspects of the Constitution can be termed as the basic structure and which cannot.
d. This theory found its first expression in the Kesavananda
Bharati case and has been discussed in subsequent judgments.
e. This theory has increased the powers of the judiciary and has come to be accepted by different political parties and the government.
7. From the information that many amendments were made during
2000-2003, which of the following conclusions would you draw?
a. Judiciary did not interfere in the amendments made during this period.
b. One political party had a strong majority during this period.
c. There was strong pressure from the pubic in favour of certain amendments.
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document d. There were no real differences among the parties during this e. The amendments were of a non-controversial nature and parties had an agreement on the subject of amendments.
8. Explain the reason for requiring special majority for amending the
Constitution.
9. Many amendments to the Constitution of India have been made due to different interpretations upheld by the Judiciary and
Parliament. Explain with examples.
10. If amending power is with the elected representatives, judiciary should NOT have the power to decide the validity of amendments.
Do you agree? Give your reasons in 100 words.
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
Chapter Ten
THE PHILOSOPHY OF
THE CONSTITUTION
INTRODUCTION
In this book, so far we have studied some important provisi
