Indian Constitution at Work they endangered a healthy national life. Rather than forced unity, our Constitution sought to evolve true fraternity, a goal dear to the heart of Dr. Ambedkar. As Sardar Patel put it, the main objective was to evolve ‘one community’.
PROCEDURAL ACHIEVEMENTS
All these five core features are what might be called the substantive achievements of the Constitution. However, there were also some procedural achievements.
± First, the Indian Constitution reflects a faith in political deliberation. We know that many groups and interests were not adequately represented in the Constituent Assembly. But the debates in the Assembly amply show that the makers of the
Constitution wanted to be as inclusive in their approach as possible. This open-ended approach indicates the willingness of people to modify their existing preferences, in short, to justify outcomes by reference not to self-interest but to reasons. It also shows a willingness to recognise creative value in difference and disagreement.
± Second, it reflects a spirit of compromise and accommodation.
These words, compromise and accommodation, should not always be seen with disapproval. Not all compromises are bad.
“But in the long run, it would be in the interest of all to forget that there is anything like majority or minority in this country and that in India there is only one community…”
Sardar Patel, CAD, Vol. VIII, p. 272, 25 May 1949
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 10: The Philosophy of the Constitution
If something of value is traded off for mere self-interest, then we naturally have compromised in the bad sense.
However, if one value is partially traded off for another value, especially in an open process of free deliberation among equals, then the compromise arrived in this manner can hardly be objected to. We may lament that we could not have everything but to secure a bit of all things important cannot be morally blame- worthy. Besides, a commitment to the idea that decisions on the most important issues must be arrived at consensually rather than by majority vote is equally morally commendable.
CRITICISMS
The Indian Constitution can be subjected to many criticisms of which three may be briefly mentioned: first, that it is unwieldy; second, that it is unrepresentative and third, that it is alien to our conditions.
The criticism that it is unwieldy is based on the assumption that the entire constitution of a country must be found in one compact document. But this is not true even of countries such as the US which do have a compact constitution. The fact is that a country’s constitution is to be identified with a compact document and with other written documents with constitutional status. Thus, it is possible to find important constitutional statements and practices outside one compact document. In the case of
India, many such details, practices and statements are included in one single document and this has made that document somewhat large in size. Many countries for instance, do not have provisions for election commission or the civil service commission in the document known as constitution. But in India, many such matters are attended to by the Constitutional document itself.
A second criticism of the Constitution is that it is unrepresentative. Do you remember how the Constituent
Assembly was formed? At that time, adult franchise was
I understand compromises in the design of institutions, but how can conflicting principles be accommodated?
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work not yet granted and most members came from the advanced sections of the society. Does this make our
Constitution unrepresentative?
Here we must distinguish two components of representation, one that might be called voice and the other opinion. The voice component of representation is important. People must be recognised in their own language or voice, not in the language of the masters. If we look at the Indian Constitution from this dimension, it is indeed unrepresentative because members of the
Constituent Assembly were chosen by a restricted franchise, not by universal suffrage. However, if we examine the other dimension, we may not find it altogether lacking in representativeness. The claim that almost every shade of opinion was represented in the Constituent
Assembly may be a trifle exaggerated but may have something to it. If we read the debates that took place in the Constituent Assembly, we find that a vast range of issues and opinions were mentioned, members raised matters not only based on their individual social concerns but based on the perceived interests and concerns of various social sections as well.
Is it a coincidence that the central square of every other small town has a statue of Dr. Ambedkar with a copy of the Indian Constitution? Far from being a mere symbolic tribute to him, this expresses the feeling among Dalits that the Constitution reflects many of their aspirations.
A final criticism alleges that the Indian Constitution is entirely an alien document, borrowed article by article from western constitutions and sits uneasily with the cultural ethos of the Indian people. This criticism is often voiced by many. Even in the Constituent Assembly itself, there were some voices that echo this concern.
How far is this charge true?
It is true that the Indian Constitution is modern and partly western. Do you remember that in the first chapter we have listed the various sources from which our
Constitution ‘borrowed’? But in this chapter you have also
Of course! Isn’t it what we learnt in the first chapter? That there should be a valid reason for every section of society to go along with the Constitution?
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 10: The Philosophy of the Constitution seen that it was never a blind borrowing. It was innovative borrowing.
Besides, as we shall see, this does not make it entirely alien.
First, many Indians have not only adopted modern ways of thinking, but have made these their own. For them westernisation became a form of protest against the filth in their own tradition.
Rammohan Roy started this trend and it is continued to this day by
Dalits. Indeed, as early as 1841, it was noticed that the Dalit people of northern India were not afraid to use the newly introduced legal system and bring suits against their landlords. So, this new instrument of modern law was effectively adopted by the people to address questions of dignity and justice.
Second, when western modernity began to interact with local cultural systems, something like a hybrid culture began to emerge, possibly by creative adaptation, for which a parallel can be found neither in western modernity nor in indigenous tradition. This cluster of newly developed phenomenon forged out of western modern and indigenous traditional cultural systems have the character of a different, alternative modernity. In non-western societies, different modernities emerged as non-western societies tried to break loose not only from their own past practices but also from the shackles of a particular version of western modernity imposed on them. Thus, when we were drafting our Constitution, efforts were made to amalgamate western and traditional Indian values. It was a process of selective adaptation and not borrowing.
Limitations
All this is not to say that the Constitution of India is a perfect and flawless document. Given the social conditions within which the
“…we wanted the music of Veena or Sitar, but here we have the music of an English band. That was because our constitution makers were educated that way.
…That is exactly the kind of Constitution Mahatma
Gandhi did not want and did not envisage.”
K. Hanumanthaiya
CAD, Vol. XI, pp.616-617, 17 November 1949
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
Constitution was made, it was only natural that there may be many controversial matters, that there would be many areas that needed careful revision. There are many features of this Constitution that have emerged mainly due to the exigencies of the time. Nonetheless, we must admit that there are many limitations to this Constitution.
Let us briefly mention the limitations of the Constitution.
± First, the Indian Constitution has a centralised idea of national unity.
± Second, it appears to have glossed over some important issues of gender justice, particularly within the family.
± Third, it is not clear why in a poor developing country, certain basic socio-economic rights were relegated to the section on Directive Principles rather than made an integral feature of our fundamental rights.
It is possible to give answers to these limitations, to explain why this happened, or even to overcome them. But that is not our point. We are arguing that these limitations are not serious enough to jeopardise the philosophy of the
Constitution.
Conclusion
In the previous chapter we described the
Constitution as a living document. It is these core features of the Constitution that give it this stature of a living document. Legal provisions and institutional arrangements depend upon the needs of the society and the philosophy adopted by the society. The Constitution gives expression to this philosophy. The institutional arrangements that we studied throughout this book are based on a core and commonly agreed vision. That vision has historically emerged through our struggle for independence. The Constituent Assembly was the platform on which this vision was stated, refined and articulated in legal-institutional form. Thus, the
No document can be perfect and no ideals can be fully achieved.
But does that mean we should have no ideals? No vision? Am I
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 10: The Philosophy of the Constitution
Constitution becomes the embodiment of this vision. Many people have said that the best summary of this vision or the philosophy of the Constitution is to be found in the preamble to our Constitution.
Have you carefully read the preamble? Apart from the various objectives mentioned in it, the preamble makes a very humble claim: the Constitution is not ‘given’ by a body of great men, it is prepared and adopted by ‘We, the people of India…’. Thus, the people are themselves the makers of their own destinies, and democracy is the instrument that people have used for shaping their present and their future. More than five decades since the Constitution was drafted, we have fought over many matters, we have seen that the courts and the governments have disagreed on many interpretations, the centre and the
States have many differences of opinion, and political parties have fought bitterly. As you will study next year, our politics has been full of problems and shortcomings. And yet, if you asked the politician or the common citizen, you will find that every one continues to share in that famous vision embodied in the Constitution: we want to live together and prosper together on the basis of the principles of equality, liberty and fraternity.
This sharing in the vision or the philosophy of the Constitution is the valuable outcome of the working of the Constitution. In
1950, making of this Constitution was a great achievement.
Today, keeping alive the philosophical vision of that Constitution may be our important achievement.
Exercises
1. The following are certain laws. Are they connected with any value?
If yes, then what is the underlying value? Give reasons.
a. Both daughters and sons will have share in the family property.
b. There will be different slabs of sales tax on different consumer c. Religious instructions will not be given in any government d. There shall be no begar or forced labour.
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
2. Which of the options given below cannot be used to complete the following statement?
Democratic countries need a constitution to
Check the power of the government.
Protect minorities from majority.
Bring independence from colonial rule.
Ensure that a long-term vision is not lost by momentary passions.
Bring social change in peaceful manner.
3. The following are different positions about reading and understanding Constituent Assembly debates.
i. Which of these statements argues that Constituent Assembly debates are relevant even today? Which statement says that they are not relevant?
ii. With which of these positions do you agree and why?
a. Common people are too busy in earning livelihood and meeting different pressures of life. They can’t understand the legal language of these debates.
b. The conditions and challenges today are different from the time when the Constitution was made. To read the ideas of
Constitution makers and use them for our new times is trying to bring past in the present c. Our ways of understanding the world and the present challenges have not changed totally. Constituent Assembly debates can provide us reasons why certain practises are important. In a period when constitutional practises are being challenged, not knowing the reasons can destroy them.
4. Explain the difference between the Indian Constitution and western ideas in the light of a. Understanding of secularism.
b. Articles 370 and 371.
c. Affirmative action.
d. Universal adult franchise.
5. Which of the following principles of secularism are adopted in the
Constitution of India?
a. that state will have nothing to do with religion b. that state will have close relation with religion c. that state can discriminate among religions
Reprint 2026-27
Chapter 10: The Philosophy of the Constitution d. that state will recognise rights of religious groups e. that state will have limited powers to intervene in affairs of religions
6. Match the following.
a. Freedom to criticise i. Substantive treatment of widows achievement b. Taking decisions in the ii. Procedural achievement constituent assembly on the basis of reason, not self interest c. Accepting importance of iii. Neglect of gender justice community in an individual’s d. Article 370 and 371 iv. Liberal individualism e. Unequal rights to women v. Attention to requirements of regarding family property and a particular region children
7. This discussion was taking place in a class. Read the various arguments and state which of these do you agree with and why.
Jayesh: I still think that our Constitution is only a borrowed document.
Saba: Do you mean to say that there is nothing Indian in it? But is there such a thing as Indian and western in the case of values and ideas? Take equality between men and women. What is western about it? And even if it is, should we reject it only because it is western?
Jayesh: What I mean is that after fighting for independence from the British, did we not adopt their system of parliamentary government?
Reprint 2026-27
Indian Constitution at Work
Neha: You forget that when we fought the British, we were not against the British as such, we were against the principle of colonialism. That has nothing to do with adopting a system of government that we wanted, wherever it came from.
8. Why is it said that the making of the Indian Constitution was unrepresentative? Does that make the Constitution unrepresentative? Give reasons for your answer.
9. One of the limitations of the Constitution of India is that it does not adequately attend to gender justice. What evidence can you give to substantiate this charge? If you were writing the Constitution today, what provisions would you recommend for remedying this limitation?
10. Do you agree with the statement that “it is not clear why in a poor developing country, certain basic socio-economic rights were relegated to the section on Directive Principles rather than made an integral feature of our Fundamental Rights”? Give reasons for your answer. What do you think are the possible reasons for putting socio-economic rights in the section on Directive Principles?
11. How did your school celebrate the Constitution Day on November
REQUEST FOR FEEDBACK
How did you like this textbook? What was your experience in reading or using this?
What were the difficulties you faced? What changes would you like to see in the next version of this book?
Write to us on all these and any other matter related to this textbook. You could be a teacher, a parent, a student or just a general reader. We value any and every feedback.
Please write to:
Coordinator (Political Science)
Department of Education in Social Sciences (DESS)
National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT)
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016.
Reprint 2026-27
