Computer SyStem 15 touch or view physically. It comprises the instructions and data to be processed using the computer hardware.
The computer software and hardware complete any task together.
The software comprises a set of instructions which on execution deliver the desired outcome. In other words, each software is written for some computational purpose. Some examples of software include operating systems like Ubuntu or Windows 7/10, word processing tool like LibreOffice or Microsoft Word, video player like
VLC Player, photo editors like GIMP and LibreOffice draw. A document or image stored on the hard disk or pen drive is referred to as a soft-copy. Once printed, the document or an image is called a hard-copy.
1.7.1 Need of Software
The sole purpose of a software is to make the computer hardware useful and operational. A software knows how to make different hardware components of a computer work and communicate with each other as well as with the end-user. We cannot instruct the hardware of a computer directly. Software acts as an interface between human users and the hardware.
Depending on the mode of interaction with hardware and functions to be performed, the software can be broadly classified into three categories viz. (i) System software, (ii) Programming tools and (iii) Application software.
1.7.2 System Software
The software that provides the basic functionality to operate a computer by interacting directly with its constituent hardware is termed as system software. A system software knows how to operate and use different hardware components of a computer. It provides services directly to the end user, or to some other software.
Examples of system software include operating systems, system utilities, device drivers, etc.
(A) Operating System
As the name implies, the operating system is a system software that operates the computer. An operating system is the most basic system software, without which other software cannot work. The operating system manages other application programs and provides
Hardware refers to the physical components of the computer system which can be seen and touched. For example,
RAM, keyboard, printer, monitor, CPU, etc. On the other hand, software is a set of instructions and data that makes hardware functional to complete the desired task.
Reprint 2026-27
