E mErging TrEnds 59 notes • A grid is a computer network of geographically dispersed and heterogeneous computational resources.
• Blockchain is a system that allows a group of connected computers to maintain a single updated and secure ledger which is updated only after all the nodes in the network authenticate the transaction.
exercIse
1. List some of the cloud-based services that you are using at present.
2. What do you understand by the Internet of Things?
List some of its potential applications.
3. Write short notes on the following:
a) Cloud Computing b) Big data and its Characteristics
4. Explain the following along with their applications.
a) Artificial Intelligence b) Machine Learning
5. Differentiate between cloud computing and grid computing with suitable examples.
6. Justify the following statement:
“Storage of data is cost-effective and time saving in cloud computing.”
7. What is on-demand service? How it is provided in cloud computing?
8. Write examples of the following:
a) Government provided cloud computing platform b) Large scale private cloud service providers and the services they provide
9. A company interested in cloud computing is looking for a provider who offers a set of basic services, such as virtual server provisioning and on demand storage that can be combined into a platform for deploying and running customised applications.
What type of cloud computing model fits these requirements?
a) Platform as a Service b) Software as a Service c) Application as a Service d) Infrastructure as a Service
Reprint 2026-27
Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi 60
10. If the government plans to make a smart school by applying IoT concepts, how can each of the following be implemented in order to transform a school into
IoT-enabled smart school?
a) e-textbooks b) Smart boards c) Online Tests d) Wifi sensors on classrooms doors e) Sensors in buses to monitor their location f) Wearables (watches or smart belts) for attendance monitoring.
11. Five friends plan to try a startup. However, they have a limited budget and limited computer infrastructure. How can they avail the benefits of cloud services to launch their startup?
12. Governments provide various scholarships to students of different classes. Prepare a report on how blockchain technology can be used to promote accountability, transparency and efficiency in distribution of scholarships?
13. How are IoT and WoT related?
14. Match the columns:
Column A Column B
1. You got a reminder to take medication
A. Smart Parking
2. You got an SMS alert that you forgot to lock the door
B. Smart
Wearable
3. You got an SMS alert that parking space is available near your block
Automation
4. You turned off your LED TV from your wrist watch
D. Smart Health
Reprint 2026-27
“Computer Science is a science of abstraction
-creating the right model for a problem and devising the appropriate mechanizable techniques to solve it.”
–A. Aho and J. Ullman
Chapter 4
Introduction to
Problem Solving
In this chapter
» Introduction
» Steps for Problem
» Algorithm
» Representation of
Algorithms
» Flow of Control
» Verifying Algorithms
» Comparison of
Algorithm
» Coding
» Decomposition
4.1 IntroductIon
Today, computers are all around us. We use them for doing various tasks in a faster and more accurate manner. For example, using a computer or smartphone, we can book train tickets online.
India is a big country and we have an enormous railway network. Thus, railway reservation is a complex task. Making reservation involves information about many aspects, such as details of trains (train type, types of berth and compartments in each train, their schedule, etc.), simultaneous booking of tickets by multiple users and many other related factors.
It is only due to the use of computers that today, the booking of the train tickets has become easy. Online booking of train tickets has added to our comfort by enabling us to book tickets from anywhere, anytime.
We usually use the term computerisation to indicate the use of computer to develop software in order to automate any routine human task efficiently. Computers are used for solving various day-to-day problems and thus problem solving is an essential skill that a computer science student should know. It is pertinent to mention that computers themselves cannot solve a problem. Precise step-by-step instructions should be given by us to solve the problem. Thus, the success of a computer in solving a problem depends on how correctly and precisely we define the problem, design a solution (algorithm) and implement the solution (program) using a programming language. Thus, problem solving is the process of identifying a problem, developing an algorithm for the identified problem and finally implementing the algorithm to develop a computer program.
Reprint 2026-27
Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi 62
4.2 S tepS for problem SolvIng
Suppose while driving, a vehicle starts making a strange noise. We might not know how to solve the problem right away. First, we need to identify from where the noise is coming? In case the problem cannot be solved by us, then we need to take the vehicle to a mechanic.
The mechanic will analyse the problem to identify the source of the noise, make a plan about the work to be done and finally repair the vehicle in order to remove the noise. From the above example, it is explicit that, finding the solution to a problem might consist of multiple steps.
When problems are straightforward and easy, we can easily find the solution. But a complex problem requires a methodical approach to find the right solution. In other words, we have to apply problem solving techniques. Problem solving begins with the precise identification of the problem and ends with a complete working solution in terms of a program or software.
Key steps required for solving a problem using a computer are shown in Figure 4.1 and are discussed in following subsections.
4.2.1 Analysing the problem
It is important to clearly understand a problem before we begin to find the solution for it. If we are not clear as to what is to be solved, we may end up developing a program which may not solve our purpose. Thus, we need to read and analyse the problem statement carefully in order to list the principal components of the problem and decide the core functionalities that our solution should have. By analysing a problem, we would be able to figure out what are the inputs that our program should accept and the outputs that it should produce.
4.2.2 Developing an Algorithm
It is essential to device a solution before writing a program code for a given problem. The solution is represented in natural language and is called an algorithm. We can imagine an algorithm like a very well-written recipe for
GIGO (Garbage In Garbage
The correctness of the output that a computer gives depends upon the correctness of input provided.
Figure 4.1: Steps for problem solving
Algorithm
A set of exact steps which when followed, solve the problem or accomplish the required task.
Reprint 2026-27
