Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi 172
4. Take a look at the series below:
1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55…
To form the pattern, start by writing 1 and 1.
Add them together to get 2. Add the last two numbers: 1+2 = 3.Continue adding the previous two numbers to find the next number in the series.
These numbers make up the famed Fibonacci sequence: previous two numbers are added to get the immediate new number.
5. Create a menu driven program using user defined functions to implement a calculator that performs the following:
a) Basic arithmetic operations(+,-,*,/)
b) log10(x),sin(x),cos(x)
SuggeSted Lab. exerciSeS
1. Write a program to check the divisibility of a number by 7 that is passed as a parameter to the user defined function.
2. Write a program that uses a user defined function that accepts name and gender (as M for Male,
F for Female) and prefixes Mr/Ms on the basis of the gender.
3. Write a program that has a user defined function to accept the coefficients of a quadratic equation in variables and calculates its determinant. For example : if the coefficients are stored in the variables a,b,c then calculate determinant as b2-4ac. Write the appropriate condition to check determinants on positive, zero and negative and output appropriate result.
4. ABC School has allotted unique token IDs from (1 to
600) to all the parents for facilitating a lucky draw on the day of their Annual day function. The winner would receive a special prize. Write a program using
Python that helps to automate the task.(Hint: use random module)
5. Write a program that implements a user defined function that accepts Principal Amount, Rate,
Time, Number of Times the interest is compounded to calculate and displays compound interest.
(Hint: CI=P*(1+r/n)nt)
Reprint 2026-27
F unctions 173
6. Write a program that has a user defined function to accept 2 numbers as parameters, if number 1 is less than number 2 then numbers are swapped and returned, i.e., number 2 is returned in place of number1 and number 1 is reformed in place of number 2, otherwise the same order is returned.
7. Write a program that contains user defined functions to calculate area, perimeter or surface area whichever is applicable for various shapes like square, rectangle, triangle, circle and cylinder.
The user defined functions should accept the values for calculation as parameters and the calculated value should be returned. Import the module and use the appropriate functions.
8. Write a program that creates a GK quiz consisting of any five questions of your choice. The questions should be displayed randomly. Create a user defined function score() to calculate the score of the quiz and another user defined function remark (scorevalue)
that accepts the final score to display remarks as follows:
Marks Remarks
5 Outstanding
4 Excellent
2 Read more to score more
1 Needs to take interest
0 General knowledge will always help you. Take it seriously.
case study -based QuestIon
For the SMIS system extended in Chapter 6 let us do the following:
1. 7.1 Convert all the functionality in Chapter 5 and 6 using user defined functions.
2. 7.2 Add another user defined function to the above menu to check if the student has short attendance or not. The function should accept total number of working days in a month and check if the student is a defaulter by calculating his or her attendance using the formula: Count of days the student was
Reprint 2026-27
