S ocietal impact 243 music or sound device. But interacting in an improper posture can be bad for us — both physically, and mentally. Besides, spending too much time on
Internet can be addictive and can have a negative impact on our physical and psychological well being.
However, these health concerns can be addressed to some extent by taking care of the way we position such devices and the way we position our posture.
Ergonomics is a branch of science that deals with designing or arranging workplaces including the furniture, equipments and systems so that it becomes safe and comfortable for the user. Ergonomics helps us in reducing the strain on our bodies — including the fatigue and injuries due to prolonged use.
When we continuously look at the screen for watching, typing, chatting or playing games, our eyes are continuously exposed to the glare coming from the screens. Looking at small handheld devices makes it worse. Eye strain is a symptom commonly complained by users of digital devices.
Device Safety: Ensures
Good Health of a
Computer System
√ Regularly clean it to keep the dust off. Use a liquid solution specifically formulated for the cleaning of electronic screens.
√ Wipe monitor’s screen often using the regular microfibre soft cloth (the one used for spectacles).
√ Keep it away from direct heat, sunlight and put it in a room with enough ventilation for air circulation.
√ Do not eat food or drink over the keyboard. Food crumbs that fall into the gaps between the keys or spilled over liquid can cause issues to the devices.
Figure 11.5: Correct posture while sitting in front of a computer
Viewing Distance 19”-24”
Wrist Straight
Seat Back Angle 90 0
Adjustable for Lower
Feet on floor footrest for shorter people
Reprint 2026-27
Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi 244
Ergonomically maintaining the viewing distance and angle, along with the position can be of some help.
Figure 11.5 shows the posture to be maintained in order to avoid fatigue caused due to prolonged use of computer system and other digital devices. However, to get rid of dry, watering, or itchy eyes, it is better to periodically focus on distant objects, and take a break for outdoor activities.
Bad posture, backaches, neck and shoulder pains can be prevented by arranging the workspace as recommended by ergonomics. Overuse of keyboards (be it physical keyboard or touchscreen-based virtual keyboard) not aligned ergonomically, can give rise to a painful condition of wrists and fingers, and may require medical help in the long run.
Stress, physical fatigue and obesity are the other related impacts the body may face if one spends too much time using digital devices.
Maintain a Balance!!
Enjoy the exciting world of digital devices in tandem with other pursuits of thrilling sports and hobbies. Online friends are good, but spending time with friends in real life is very fulfilling. Often the wholesome nature of real interactions cannot be compared to just online social networking.
• Digital footprint is the trail of data we leave behind when we visit any website (or use any online application or portal) to fill-in data or perform any transaction.
• A user of digital technology needs to follow certain etiquettes like net-etiquettes, communication- etiquettes and social media-etiquettes.
• Net-etiquette includes avoiding copyright violations, respecting privacy and diversity of users, and avoiding cyber bullies and cyber trolls, besides sharing of expertise.
• Communication-etiquette requires us to be precise and polite in our conversation so that we remain credible through our remarks and comments.
• While using social media, one needs to take care of security through password, be aware of fake information and be careful while befriending unknowns. Care must be taken while sharing anything on social media as it may create havoc if being mishandled, particularly our personal, sensitive information.
• Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) help in data protection through copyrights, patents and trademarks. There are both ethical and legal
Reprint 2026-27
