S ocietal impact 249 b) Plagiarism and Copyright infringement c) Non-ethical hacking and Ethical hacking d) Active and Passive footprints e) Free software and Free and open source software
13. If you plan to use a short text from an article on the web, what steps must you take in order to credit the sources used?
14. When you search online for pictures, how will you find pictures that are available in the free public domain. How can those pictures be used in your project without copyright violations?
15. Describe why it is important to secure your wireless router at home. Search the Internet to find the rules to create a reasonably secure password. Create an imaginary password for your home router. Will you share your password for home router with following people. Justify your answer.
a) Parents b) Friends c) Neighbours d) Home Tutors
16. List down the steps you need to take in order to a) your computer is in good working condition for a longer time.
b) smart and safe Internet surfing.
17. What is data privacy? Websites that you visit collect what type of information about you?
18. In the computer science class, Sunil and Jagdish were assigned the following task by their teacher.
a) Sunil was asked to find information about
“India, a Nuclear power”. He was asked to use
Google Chrome browser and prepare his report using Google Docs.
b) Jagdish was asked to find information about
“Digital India”. He was asked to use Mozilla
Firefox browser and prepare his report using
Libre Office Writer.
What is the difference between technologies used by Sunil and Jagdish?
Reprint 2026-27
Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi 250
19. Cite examples depicting that you were a victim of following cyber crime. Also, cite provisions in IT Act to deal with such a cyber crime.
a) Identity theft b) Credit card account theft
20. Neerja is a student of Class XI. She has opted for
Computer Science. Neerja prepared the project assigned to her. She mailed it to her teacher. The snapshot of that email is shown below.
Find out which of the following email etiquettes are missing in it. Justify your answer.
a) Subject of the mail b) Formal greeting c) Self-explanatory terms d) Identity of the sender e) Regards
21. Sumit got good marks in all the subjects. His father gifted him a laptop. He would like to make
Sumit aware of health hazards associated with inappropriate and excessive use of laptop. Help his father to list the points which he should discuss with Sumit.
Reprint 2026-27
