PAIR OF LINEAR EQUATIONS IN TWO VARIABLES 37 (iv) Meena went to a bank to withdraw ` 2000. She asked the cashier to give her
` 50 and ` 100 notes only. Meena got 25 notes in all. Find how many notes of
` 50 and ` 100 she received.
(v) A lending library has a fixed charge for the first three days and an additional charge for each day thereafter. Saritha paid ` 27 for a book kept for seven days, while Susy paid ` 21 for the book she kept for five days. Find the fixed charge and the charge for each extra day.
3.4 Summary
In this chapter, you have studied the following points:
1. A pair of linear equations in two variables can be represented, and solved, by the:
(i) graphical method (ii) algebraic method
2. Graphical Method :
The graph of a pair of linear equations in two variables is represented by two lines.
(i) If the lines intersect at a point, then that point gives the unique solution of the two equations. In this case, the pair of equations is consistent.
(ii) If the lines coincide, then there are infinitely many solutions — each point on the line being a solution. In this case, the pair of equations is dependent (consistent).
(iii) If the lines are parallel, then the pair of equations has no solution. In this case, the pair of equations is inconsistent.
3. Algebraic Methods : We have discussed the following methods for finding the solution(s)
of a pair of linear equations :
(i) Substitution Method (ii) Elimination Method
4. If a pair of linear equations is given by a1x + b1y + c1 = 0 and a2x + b2y + c2 = 0, then the following situations can arise :
 : In this case, the pair of linear equations is consistent.
(ii) 1 1 1
  : In this case, the pair of linear equations is inconsistent.
(iii) 1 1 1
  : In this case, the pair of linear equations is dependent and consistent.
5. There are several situations which can be mathematically represented by two equations that are not linear to start with. But we alter them so that they are reduced to a pair of linear equations.
Reprint 2026-27
