T RIANGLES 97
11. In Fig. 6.40, E is a point on side CB produced of an isosceles triangle ABC with AB = AC. If AD  BC and EF  AC, prove that  ABD ~  ECF.
12. Sides AB and BC and median AD of a triangle ABC are respectively propor- tional to sides PQ and QR and median
PM of  PQR (see Fig. 6.41). Show that
 ABC ~  PQR.
13. D is a point on the side BC of a triangle
ABC such that  ADC =  BAC. Show that CA2 = CB.CD.
14. Sides AB and AC and median AD of a triangle ABC are respectively proportional to sides PQ and PR and median PM of another triangle PQR.
Show that  ABC ~  PQR.
15. A vertical pole of length 6 m casts a shadow 4 m long on the ground and at the same time a tower casts a shadow 28 m long. Find the height of the tower.
16. If AD and PM are medians of triangles ABC and PQR, respectively where
 ABC ~  PQR, prove that AB AD
6.5 Summary
In this chapter you have studied the following points :
1. Two figures having the same shape but not necessarily the same size are called similar figures.
2. All the congruent figures are similar but the converse is not true.
3. Two polygons of the same number of sides are similar, if (i) their corresponding angles are equal and (ii) their corresponding sides are in the same ratio (i.e., proportion).
4. If a line is drawn parallel to one side of a triangle to intersect the other two sides in distinct points, then the other two sides are divided in the same ratio.
5. If a line divides any two sides of a triangle in the same ratio, then the line is parallel to the third side.
6. If in two triangles, corresponding angles are equal, then their corresponding sides are in the same ratio and hence the two triangles are similar (AAA similarity criterion).
7. If in two triangles, two angles of one triangle are respectively equal to the two angles of the other triangle, then the two triangles are similar (AA similarity criterion).
Fig. 6.40
Fig. 6.41
Reprint 2026-27
98 MATHEMATICS
8. If in two triangles, corresponding sides are in the same ratio, then their corresponding angles are equal and hence the triangles are similar (SSS similarity criterion).
9. If one angle of a triangle is equal to one angle of another triangle and the sides including these angles are in the same ratio (proportional), then the triangles are similar (SAS similarity criterion).
A NOTE TO THE READER
If in two right triangles, hypotenuse and one side of one triangle are proportional to the hypotenuse and one side of the other triangle, then the two triangles are similar. This may be referred to as the
RHS Similarity Criterion.
If you use this criterion in Example 2, Chapter 8, the proof will become simpler.
Reprint 2026-27
