Session 9: Communication and Networking —
Introduction to e-mail
Session 10: Communication and Networking — Creating an e-mail Account
Session 11: Communication and Networking — Writing an
Session 12: Communication and Networking — Receiving and Replying to e-mails
Unit 4: Entrepreneurship Skills 135
Session 1: What is Entrepreneurship? 135
Session 2: Role of Entrepreneurship 139
Session 3: Qualities of a Successful Entrepreneur 142
Session 4: Distinguishing Characteristics of
Entrepreneurship and Wage Employement
Session 5: Types of Business Activities 152
Session 6: Product, Service and Hybrid Businesses 155
Session 7: Entrepreneurship Development Process 159
Unit 5: Green Skills 163
Session 1: Society and Environment 164
Session 2: Conserving Natural Resources 178
Session 3: Sustainable Development and Green Economy 181
Answer Key 194
Prelims.indd 12 24-08-2018 16:44:34
IntroductIon
Communication skills are those skills which are needed to speak and write properly. A person who is able to speak appropriately whilst maintaining eye contact with the audience, uses varied vocabulary and articulate speech to suit the need of the audience is generally said to be an effective speaker. Similarly, an effective writer should be able to use written words in various styles and techniques to communicate his/her message and ideas to the readers. One should have the ability to listen carefully and write and speak clearly in any situation.
Therefore good reading, writing, speaking and listening skills are essential for effective communication.
As a student, you may study any language, but it is important that you are able to read, write, speak and listen well in order to communicate properly. Speaking more than one language can help you to communicate well with people around the world. Learning English can help you to communicate with people who understand
English besides the language you have been exposed to speaking the language from easly childhood, for example, your mother tongue. In the present time, a thorough
Unit Unit
Communication
Unit 1.indd 1 24-08-2018 15:24:21
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 2 knowledge of the language with communication skills is very important in any occupation or to set up a business.
S eSSIon 1: IntroductIon to communIcatIon
You probably hear people talking about communication all the time. Everyone needs it and wants it, but what exactly is communication? Let us try to understand it.
The word ‘Communication’ comes from the Latin word commūnicāre, meaning ‘to share’. In Figure 1.1, you can see that communication is the ‘sharing’ of information between two or more individuals or within a group to reach a common understanding.
Importance of communication
Your ability to communicate clearly and share thoughts, feelings and ideas will help you in all your relationships.
For example, you can inform about something or you can also influence others through communication.
Communication skills are needed to:
• Inform: You may be required to give facts or information to someone. For example, communicating the timetable of an exam to a
• Influence: You may be required to influence or change someone in an indirect but usually important way. For example, negotiating with a shopkeeper to reduce the price or helping a friend to overcome stress due to exam or any other reason.
Figure 1.1: Communication Process
Asking for
Information
Information Receiving
Information
Unit 1.indd 2 24-08-2018 15:24:21
CommuniCation SkillS 3
• Express feelings: Talking about your feelings is a healthy way to express them. For example, sharing your excitement about doing well in your exams or sharing your feelings with your parents and friends.
Elements of communication
Communication is a two-way exchange of information, i.e., giving and receiving (Fig. 1.2). Speaking and writing to someone are examples of giving information.
Reading and listening to someone are examples of receiving information.
Perspectives in communication
Perspectives are ideas, views, or fixed ways of thinking.
These sometimes affect our communication. For example, if you have a fixed idea that your teacher or father is strict, even when they are being friendly, you may think they are scolding you even though they are polite. In the same way, others may also have fixed ideas about you, which affect whatever you say to them.
Figure 1.2: Elements of Communication
Unit 1.indd 3 24-08-2018 15:24:22
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 4
Factors affecting perspectives in communication
Sometimes, we are not able to communicate clearly because of barriers that stop us from sharing and understanding messages. Some of these are summarised in Table 1.1.
Table 1.1: Factors affecting Perspectives in Communication
Factor How the factor can become a barrier
Language In case of use of incorrect words, unfamiliar language and lack of detail, language can act as a barrier to communicate what one wishes to convey. For example, language can act as a barrier when an Indian who only knows Hindi and Chinese who has the knowledge of Mandarin only want to interact with each other.
Visual Perception Visual perception is the brain’s ability to make sense of what we see through our eyes. For example, completing partially drawn pictures with visual perception whereas they may be something else.
Past Experience Letting our earlier experience stop us from understanding or communicating clearly. For example, “This shopkeeper cheated me last time. Let me be careful or “I scored low marks in my Maths exam, so I am scared to ask and answer questions in class.”
Prejudice Fixed ideas, such as thinking “No one in my class likes me” may stop a student from communicating openly in the class.
Feelings Our feelings and emotions, such as lack of interest or not trusting the other person affect communication. For example “I am not feeling well, therefore, I don’t want to talk.”
Environment Noise or disturbance in the surroundings may make communication difficult. Example, talking to a friend in a function where there is loud music being played by the orchestra.
Personal factors Personal factors include your own feelings, habits and ways of thinking. For example, fear, and low confidence may make communication difficult.
Culture Signs’ which have a different meaning in different cultures, such as showing a thumb may mean ‘good job’ done for some people but may be insulting to others.
Effective communication
Effective communication can happen if we follow the basic principles of professional communication skills.
These can be abbreviated as 7 Cs, i.e., Clear, Concise,
Concrete, Correct, Coherent, Complete and Courteous.
These are further explained in Figure 1.3.
Unit 1.indd 4 24-08-2018 15:24:22
