CommuniCation SkillS 5
Figure 1.3: 7Cs of Effective Communication
There are different methods of communication, which include non-verbal, verbal and visual.
The teacher will facilitate these activities by showing you the e-learning module for this lesson via http://www.psscive.ac.in/
Employability_Skills.html. The module will include videos and e-content for the above topics as well as detailed instructions for some activities below.
Initial thinking activity
After watching the initial video in the e-learning lesson for this topic, answer the following question: Why is it important to communicate clearly and effectively?
Activity 1
Role Play on Communication Process
Procedure
• Form groups with three students in each group.
• Act out a conversation between the three people. The situation is that you need to sell some items to an old couple who has come to a shop. One person can act as the salesperson and the other two as an old man and his wife.
• Discuss what you learned from this.
Activity 2
Group discussion and sharing experience on factors affecting perspectives in communication
Procedure
• Form groups with three students in each group.
• Ask each group to select any one of the eight factors (as given in Table 1.1) which act as barriers to communication.
Unit 1.indd 5 24-08-2018 15:24:22
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 6
• Discuss how it can affect or become a barrier to good communication with family, friends, in school or at a retail store. Each group shares their experiences related to one of the eight factors.
Activity 3
7Cs of effective communication
Materials required
Pen/pencil, notebook
Procedure
• Write down examples of the 7Cs of communication in their notebook.
• For each of the 7Cs, a student volunteer to give his/her example of how to communicate well. The other students (with teacher’s guidance) say if it is correct or incorrect.
Activity 4
Elements of communication
Material required
Chart paper, colours and pencil
Procedure
Make a chart showing the elements of communication in the communication process cycle.
Check Your Progress
A. Multiple choice questions
Read the questions carefully and circle the letter (a), (b), (c) or (d) that best answers the question.
1. What is the purpose of communication?
(a) Inform (tell someone about something)
(b) Influence (get someone to do something you want)
(c) Share thoughts, ideas, feelings (d) All of the above
2. Which of the following methods are used to receive information from the sender through a letter?
(a) Listening (b) Speaking (c) Reading (d) Writing
3. How do you receive information on phone?
(a) Listening (b) Speaking (c) Reading (d) Writing
Unit 1.indd 6 24-08-2018 15:24:22
CommuniCation SkillS 7
After completing this session, you will be able to
• identify the elements of communication.
• draw a communication cycle showing all the elements of communication.
• identify the factors affecting our perspectives in communication.
B. Match the columns
Column A:
Communication
Barriers
Column B: Examples
1. Language A. Trying to read a book when somebody else is watching TV in the same room.
2. Emotional B. In some cultures, wearing shoes and walking inside the kitchen is considered rude and disrespectful.
3. Environmental C. Talking in Hindi when others know only Tamil.
4. Cultural D. Parent is not talking to the child.
C. Short answer question
1. Write down the seven factors affecting perspectives in communication.
2. Give an example of the following:
(a) Clear communication (b) Complete communication
What have you learnt?
S eSSIon 2: Verbal communIcatIon
Verbal communication is the sharing of information by using words. It is what most people use as a method of communication. We will learn about non-verbal and visual communication in the next session. Verbal communication is important because if you do not use the right words, you will cause confusion and you will not be able to communicate what you want. The important forms of verbal communication are given in
Table 1.2.
Unit 1.indd 7 24-08-2018 15:24:22
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 8
Table 1.2: Verbal Communication
Type of Verbal
Communication
Examples
Oral or Spoken
Communication:
Communication which involves talking
Face-to-face conversation: When you can see the listener.
For example, group discussion, talking to family member at home, conversation with public through speeches, etc.
Talking on a phone: This is for personal and official communication.
Phone conversations should begin with a greeting (Hello), talking and listening to each other. The conversation can end with a ‘Thank you’ and ‘Bye’.
Classroom teaching, business discussion and public speeches are other examples of oral communication, where one person talks to many others at once.
Communication:
Communication which involves written or typed words.
Writing letters, notes, email, etc.
SMS (Short Message Service): These can be sent through a phone to a person or a
Using email to share news, thoughts, documents and files (including photos, videos, music, etc.). Can be used to send messages to a person or to a group.
Books and newspapers.
Unit 1.indd 8 24-08-2018 15:24:23
