CommuniCation SkillS 9
Advantages of verbal communication
Verbal communication is easy and quick. You can say what you want and get a quick response. It is an easier form of communication when you have to exchange ideas. You keep changing your communication as per the other person’s reply.
Disadvantages of verbal communication
The most common disadvantage of verbal communication is the cultural differences between the sender and receiver of the information. These differences may be due to the use of different languages, inability to understand the colloquial phrases used by the other individual, and the accent. Since verbal communication depends on words, sometimes the meanings become confusing and difficult to understand if the right words are not used.
Public speaking
Speaking in front of a large group makes most people nervous. You can use the 3Ps (Prepare, Practice,
Perform) method to get over your fears, and become a confident and effective speaker. These points are shown in Table 1.3.
Table 1.3: 3Ps of Public Speaking
The teacher will facilitate these activities by showing you the e-learning module for this lesson via http://www.psscive.ac.in/
Employability_Skills.html. The module will include videos and e-content for the above topics as well as detailed instructions for some activities below.
3Ps of Public Speaking
Prepare Think about your topic
Think about what your listeners need to know about the topic
Think about the best way to make your listeners understand your topic
Write what you plan to say
Practice Practice by yourself first, talk in front of a mirror
Talk in front of your family and friends and ask them what they think
Speak clearly, loudly and at the right speed (not very fast nor very slow)
Perform Take a few deep breaths if you are feeling nervous
Think about what you have prepared and start speaking confidently
Unit 1.indd 9 24-08-2018 15:24:23
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 10
Initial thinking activity
After watching the video in the e-learning lesson for this topic write down why do you think Tina’s directions were not understood? How would you give directions on the phone?
Activity 1
Role play of a phone conversation
Materials required
Notebook, pen
Procedure
• Form groups comprising at least three students in each
• Write a script on a phone conversation, based on a scenario given by your teacher. For example, the scenario could be a conversation between a person from the Call
Centre and customer talking about the product that is to be delivered at the customer’s residence.
• One student acts as a caller and the other as receiver.
• Speak the conversation aloud.
• The third student gives feedback on the effectiveness of the communication, keeping in mind the 7Cs of communication.
Activity 2
Public speaking
Materials required
Notebook, pen
Procedure
• Form groups of three students in each group.
• Within the group, choose a topic for a very short speech.
• Use paragraphs.
• Each person uses the 3Ps (Prepare, Practice and Perform)
method and makes a speech to the others in the group.
• Others give feedback — was the person able to communicate properly?
• One student volunteers to give a speech in front of the class.
Check Your Progress
A. Multiple choice questions
Read the questions carefully and circle the letter (a), (b), (c)
or (d) that best answers the question.
1. Choose the correct example of oral communication.
(a) Reports (b) Newspapers
Unit 1.indd 10 24-08-2018 15:24:23
CommuniCation SkillS 11
After completing this session, you will be able to
• explain the verbal method of communication.
• list the 7Cs of communication.
• speak confidently in public using the 3Ps method.
(c) Face-to-face conversation (d) Notes
2. When we communicate verbally, we should use _______.
(a) difficult words (b) simple words (c) confusing words (d) abbreviations
3. Why do we send emails?
(a) To reach on time (b) To share documents and files (c) To talk to each other (d) To meet each other
B. Short answer question
1. Write down the different types of verbal communication.
Give an example for each type.
What have you learnt?
Non-verbal communication is the message we send to others without using any words as shown in
Figure 1.4. We send signals and messages to others, through expressions, gestures and body postures.
In this session, you will learn about the non-verbal method of communication, its types and importance. You will learn to use the correct body language, like gestures, eye contact, handshake, etc. Figure1.4: Non-verbal Communication
LANGUAGE
EXPRESSIONS
CONTACT GESTURES
SPACE TOUCH
S eSSIon 3: non-V erbal communIcatIon
Unit 1.indd 11 24-08-2018 15:24:23
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 12
Importance of non-verbal communication
In our day-to-day communication, it is observed that most of the communication is done using body movements (face, arms, movements, etc.) and voice control (voice, tone, pauses, etc.).
As we can see in Figure 1.5, maximum communication is non-verbal. We communicate using words, tone of voice and body language as shown in Table 1.4.
Voice Control (Non-verbal)
Expressions,
Movements,
Pictures (Non-verbal and (Verbal)
Figure 1.5: Methods of Communication
Table 1.4: Types of Non-verbal Communication
Non-Verbal Communication Exchanging information without words
Hand movements (gestures)
and body language
• Raising a hand to greet
• Pointing your finger in
Expressions • Smiling to show happiness
• Making a sad face when you are upset
Non-verbal communication makes our message stronger. Using the right gestures while speaking makes our message more effective. Knowing non-verbal communication helps us understand our audience’s reaction and adjust our behaviour or communication accordingly.
Unit 1.indd 12 24-08-2018 15:24:23
CommuniCation SkillS 13
Using the right gestures and postures helps us to be professional at work. If verbal messages are blocked by noise or distance, etc., we can use hand movements to exchange our message. Placing a finger on the lips to indicate the need for silence and nodding the head up and saying ‘ yes’.
We communicate non-verbally in many ways. Let us learn about some of these (see Table 1.5).
Table 1.5: Types of Non-verbal Communication
Type What it implies How to make use of non-verbal communication effectively?
Facial Expression A facial expression many a times shows the feelings of a person. For example, when we are happy, we express it through a smile or when we are sad we show a gloomy
• Keep your face relaxed
• Try to match your expression with what you are saying
• If you agree with something, you may nod while listening, which indicates that it has your assent
Posture Postures are positions of the body. They show our confidence and feelings.
For example, straight body posture is seen as confidence. Holding your head may be taken as tiredness.
• Keep your upper body relaxed and, shoulders straight
• Sit straight, rest hands and feet in relaxed position
• Keep hands by your sides while standing
Gestures or
Body Language
Gestures describe movements of parts of the body, especially hands or head, to express an idea or meaning. This includes waving, pointing and using our hands when speaking.
For example, raising a hand may mean asking a question. Biting nails show nervousness.
• Avoid pointing at people with your finger
• Instead of keeping your hands in pocket while talking, try to keep your hands on the sides
• Bend your head a little while talking or listening to show that you are paying attention.
Unit 1.indd 13 24-08-2018 15:24:24
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 14
Touch We communicate a great deal through our touch, such as shaking hands and patting on the back. For example, a firm handshake shows confidence. Sports coaches pat on the back of the players to encourage the players.
• Shake hands firmly
• Avoid other touch gestures, such as stroking your hair, scratching your nose, tugging on your clothes, etc., during formal communication
Space The space between two persons while communicating, generally depends on the intimacy or closeness between them.
• Maintain proper space’ depending on the relationship, which could be formal or informal or the closeness with the person with whom you are
Eye Contact Maintaining an eye contact with the person you are talking indicates interest, whereas, looking away can make the other person feel ignored.
• Look at the person who is speaking
• Keep a relaxed, pleasant look
• Break the look every few
Paralanguage Paralanguage is the tone of our voice, speed and volume that makes a difference in the meaning of the communication.
Speaking too fast may show excitement or nervousness.
Speaking too slow may show seriousness, sadness or making a point.
• Use a proper tone and volume while speaking
• Maintain a moderate rate (speed) of talking
Visual communication
Another important method of communication is visual communication, which involves sending and understanding messages only through images or pictures. The main advantage of this type of communication is that you do not need to know any particular language for understanding it. It is simple,
Unit 1.indd 14 24-08-2018 15:24:24
CommuniCation SkillS 15
Table 1.6: Examples of Visual Communication
Visual Communication: Exchanging Information through Images
Traffic symbol which communicates not to blow horn
Traffic Lights—Red for
Stop; Yellow for Wait and
Green for Go
Sign for ladies and gents toilet Sign showing railway crossing
Sign for flammable substances Sign for slippery surface
Sign used to pause a video or audio file in smartphone or computer
Sign which communicates that the area is a no smoking zone easy to understand and remains same across different places. Table 1.6 shows some common types of visual communication.
The teacher will facilitate these activities by showing you the e-learning module for this lesson via http://www.psscive.ac.in/
Employability Skills.html. The module will include videos and e-content for the above topics as well as detailed instructions for some activities below.
Initial thinking activity
After watching the initial video in the e-learning lesson for this topic write down how could Rohit understand something was wrong with Amar? Can you understand how your friends are feeling even when they do not tell you anything?
Activity 1
Role play using non-verbal communication
Materials required
Notebook, pen
Unit 1.indd 15 24-08-2018 15:24:24
