E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 16
A. Multiple choice questions
Read the questions carefully and circle the letter (a), (b), (c) or (d) that best answers the question.
1. Which of these is a positive (good) facial expression?
(a) Staring hard (b) Nodding while listening (c) Wrinkled forehead (d) Looking away from the speaker
2. What does an upright (straight) body posture convey/ (a) Shyness (b) Fear
Procedure
• Form groups with three students in each group.
• Prepare the script for the role play, based on the scenario given by your teacher.
• Act it out in front of your group.
• One of the group volunteers to act before the whole class.
• Discuss how students used non-verbal communication.
Activity 2
Dos and Don’ts to avoid body language mistakes
Materials required
Notebook, pen
Procedure
• In the same group of three students, as in Activity 1, discuss what things you should do and what you should not do to avoid mistakes in communication.
• Every student should write down a list of these Dos and
Activity 3
Comparing methods of communication
Materials required
Notebook, pen
Procedure
• In the same group of three students, as in Activity 1, discuss the three methods of communication (Verbal,
Non-verbal, and Visual).
• Prepare a list of the advantages and disadvantages of each method.
Check Your Progress
Unit 1.indd 16 24-08-2018 15:24:24
CommuniCation SkillS 17 (c) Confidence (d) Intelligence
3. Which of these is not an appropriate non-verbal communication at work?
(a) Putting arm around a coworker’s shoulder (b) Shaking hands firmly (c) Looking at the speaker with a smile (d) Standing with an upright posture
4. When you are preparing for a presentation, you should
__________________.
(a) focus on the objectives of the presentation (b) practice your speech in front of a mirror or friend (c) do rehearsals to time your presentation of slides (d) All of the above
B. Put a × mark against the actions below which are incorrect for demonstrating the use of non-verbal communication
• Laughing during formal communication
• Scratching head
• Smiling when speaking to a friend
• Nodding when you agree with something
• Standing straight
• Yawning while listening
• Sitting straight
• Maintaining eye contact while speaking
• Biting nails
• Firm handshake
• Clenching jaws
• Looking away when someone is speaking to you
• Intense stare
C. Short answer questions
1. Give examples of any four common signs used for visual communication.
After completing this session, you will be able to
• explain the importance of non-verbal and visual communication.
• identify different types of non-verbal communication.
• use the right non-verbal communication at work.
• avoid common mistakes in non-verbal communication.
What Have You Learnt?
Unit 1.indd 17 24-08-2018 15:24:24
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 18
S eSSIon 4: WrItIng SkIllS: PartS of SPeech
When we talk or write in English, we use sentences to express ourselves. Sentences are important because if you do not clearly write sentences then, the meaning of the same cannot be understood clearly. A sentence is a group of words that communicates a complete thought (Example: Raju goes to school). A group of words, which does not make complete sense, is known as a phrase (Example: Raju goes). A sentence always begins with a capital letter, and it always ends with a question mark, full stop or exclamation mark. Read out aloud the examples given below.
• Did you work on your project?
• I completed it yesterday.
• That is good!
Using capitals
We know that all sentences begin with capital letters.
Do you know at what other points in a sentence we should use capital letters?
It is easy to know what to capitalise if you remember the word ‘MINTS’. MINTS is a set of simple rules that help you capitalise words correctly. Each letter in the word MINTS refers to one capitalisation rule as shown in Table 1.7.
Table 1.7: Capitalisation Rules
Alphabet M I N T S
Months The letter Names Titles Starting letter of sentences
Rule Capitalise the first letter in all the names of months.
Capitalise the letter ‘I’ when it is used to begin a word.
Capitalise the first letter in the names of people, places and days.
Capitalise the first letter in the titles used before people’s
Capitalise the first letter in sentence.
Example I will go to college in
I play tennis with him every day.
This Tuesday,
Vidya will be in Rajasthan.
Dr Shah and
Mr Patel work together.
The cat ran out of the
Unit 1.indd 18 24-08-2018 15:24:24
CommuniCation SkillS 19
Punctuation
It is a set of marks, such as the full stop and the comma, which help us separate parts of a sentence and explain its meaning. Like uppercase letters, punctuation is also a very important part of sentences and has some rules.
Some common punctuation marks and their use have been given in Table 1.8.
Table 1.8: Punctuation Marks
Punctuation
Sign Use Examples
Full stop . Shows the end of a sentence. Also used to show short form of long words. For example, ‘doctor’ can be shortened to ‘Dr’ when we use it as a title before a name.
This is a sentence. This is another sentence.
Sanjay is a doctor. His patients call him Dr Sanjay.
Comma , Sometimes, we use a comma to indicate a pause in the sentence.
After the waiter gave me a menu, I ordered food.
We can also use a comma to separate items when we are listing out more than two items in a row.
I bought apples, oranges and
Question
? We use a question mark at the end of a question.
What is your name?
How old are you?
Exclamation
! We use an exclamation mark at the end of a word or a sentence to indicate a strong feeling, such as surprise, shock or anger.
What a pleasant surprise!
You are late!
Apostrophe (’) We use an apostrophe followed by an s to show that something belongs to someone.
That is Divya’s pen.
Are these Abdul’s books?
We also use an apostrophe to indicate the shortened form of some words in informal speech.
Let’s go. (Instead of Let us
He isn’t here. (Instead of He is not here.)
Basic parts of speech
There are eight basic parts of speech in the English language. These are noun, pronoun, verb, adjective, adverb, preposition, conjunction and interjection. The part of speech indicates how the word functions in meaning as well as grammatically within the sentence.
Unit 1.indd 19 24-08-2018 15:24:24
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 20
A noun is a word for a person, place, thing, or idea. Nouns are often used with an article (the, a, an), but not always. A pronoun is a word used in place of a noun. A verb expresses action or being. An adjective modifies or describes a noun or pronoun. An adverb modifies or describes a verb, an adjective, or another adverb. A preposition is a word placed before a noun or pronoun to form a phrase modifying another word in the sentence. A conjunction joins words, phrases, or clauses. An interjection is a word used to express emotion. You should be able to use these parts of the speech in making sentences.
The different types of words we use in sentences are called parts of speech. Some examples are nouns,
Figure 1.6: Parts of Speech
Unit 1.indd 20 24-08-2018 15:24:24
CommuniCation SkillS 21
Table 1.9: Parts of Speech
Parts of Speech What they do Example sentences Example
Noun Nouns are words that refer to a person, place, thing or idea. These are
‘naming words.’
In the sentence, ‘Reema wrote a letter.’ Both Reema and letter are nouns.
Pronoun A pronoun is a word used in place of a noun
In the second sentence,
“Reema wrote a letter.
She is tired.” ‘She’ is used in place of the noun Reema, it is a pronoun.
Adjectives Adjectives are words that describe other
In the sentence “Reema wrote a long letter.” Long is an adjective that describes the noun ‘letter’.
Verbs Verbs are words that show action
In the sentence: “Reema wrote a letter.” Wrote is the verb.
It tells what action Reema did.
Adverbs Adverbs are words that add meaning to verbs, adjectives, or other adverbs. They answer the questions — How?
How often? When? And
In the sentence “Reema quickly wrote a letter.” Quickly is an adverb. It tells us how Reema did the action (writing).
Let us now see how these words are used. Read aloud the sentence given below.
Wow! Reema went to the studio and met a famous
We already know that Reema, studio and actor are nouns. Famous is an adjective here because it describes the noun actor and the words went and met are verbs because they describe an action.
What about the remaining words in this sentence wow, to, the, and? What are these words called? We use such supporting words to join the main parts of speech together and to add information to the sentences we make. Let us now look at these supporting words.
pronouns, adjectives, verbs and adverbs, as shown in
Figure 1.6. Let us read more about them in Table 1.9.
Unit 1.indd 21 24-08-2018 15:24:24
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 22
Along with the main ‘Parts of Speech’, there are some more words we need for making a sentence. These are shown in Figure 1.7. Let us learn more about them using Table 1.10.
Table 1.10: Supporting Parts of Speech
Supporting Parts of Speech Use Examples
Articles The words ‘a’, ‘an’ and ‘the’ are known as articles. Articles are generally used before nouns.
An is used before words with a vowel (a,e,i,o,u) sound
A is used before nouns with a consonant (all other alphabets)
The is used to refer to specific or particular words
The car stopped suddenly because a cat ran in front of it.
An apple
An umbrella
Conjunctions Conjunctions are words that join two nouns, phrases or sentences.
Some common conjunctions are
‘and’, ‘or’ and ‘but’.
Instead of, Sheela went to the market. I also went to the market.
Sheela and I went to the market.
Instead of, “Do you want oranges?
Do you want apples?”
“Do you want oranges or apples?”
Prepositions Prepositions connect one word with another to show the relation between them. They usually answer the questions ‘where’,
‘when’ and ‘how’.
Some common prepositions are ‘on’,
‘at’, ‘under’ and ‘in’.
The cat is on the roof.
The shop is at the end of the road.
Rahul is standing under the tree.
I live in Delhi.
Supporting parts of speech types
Figure 1.7: Supporting Parts of Speech
Unit 1.indd 22 24-08-2018 15:24:25
CommuniCation SkillS 23
Interjections These words express strong emotions, such as happiness, surprise, anger or pain. They have an exclamation mark at the end.
The teacher will facilitate these activities by showing you the e-learning module for this lesson via http://www.psscive.ac.in/
Employability_Skills.html. The module will include videos and e-content for the above topics as well as detailed instructions for some activities below.
Initial thinking activity
After watching the initial video in the e-learning lesson for this topic write down what do you think was wrong with Seema’s
Activity 1
Identifying parts of speech
Materials required
Notebook, pen
Procedure
Read aloud the paragraph given below.
“on sunday, i have an appointment to meet Dr. Patel in delhi.
my house is near Mr. Patels shop i went to his shop on friday to buy vegetables I bought potatoes onions carrots and a cabbage
Mr. Patel is a friendly man have you met him”
• This paragraph contains examples of the parts of speech you learnt about in this lesson.
• Identify as many of these parts of speech as you can and mark them.
• Write the paragraph with proper punctuation and capitalisation.
Activity 2
Constructing sentences
Materials required
Notebook, pen
Procedure
• Form pairs of students.
• List out five parts of speech that you learnt in the lesson.
• Select one of them and create two simple sentences which use these parts of speech.
Unit 1.indd 23 24-08-2018 15:24:25
