E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 30
Paragraphs
You have learnt about sentences. A group of sentences forms a paragraph. While writing a paragraph, make sure the sentences have a common idea. When you want to write about a different idea, make a new paragraph. For example, if you are writing about your school, the first paragraph can be of sentences about the name, location, size and other such details. In the next paragraph you can use sentences to describe what you like about your school.
I go to Government Higher Secondary School, Balachadi.
There are about 100 students and seven teachers in my school. My school is on the main road, very close to the City
Railway Station and local hospital. I love going to school and learning new lessons. My school has a playground where I play cricket with my friends at the end of the day.
There is a library too and I borrow one book every week. I love my school.
The teacher will facilitate these activities by showing you the e-learning module for this lesson via http://www.psscive.ac.in/
Employability_Skills.html. The module will include videos and e-content for the above topics as well as detailed instructions for some activities below.
Initial thinking activity
After watching the initial video in the e-learning lesson for this topic write down if you think that Sanjay and Dia were able to make correct sentences?
Activity 1
Making sentences
Materials required
Notebook, pen
Procedure
• Form pairs of students.
• First, write down three sentences that contain direct objects. Then, write down three other sentences that contain both direct and indirect objects.
Unit 1.indd 30 24-08-2018 15:24:25
CommuniCation SkillS 31
• Use different colours to mark the different parts of each sentence (Subject, Verb, Object).
• One volunteer shows their list to the class, who correct if needed.
Activity 2
Active and passive voice
Materials required
Notebook, pen
Procedure
• With the same pairs as above, write a paragraph on any
• The paragraph should have at least two sentences in active voice and two sentences in passive voice.
• One volunteer reads out their paragraph to the class.
• The class gives feedback, if correct.
Activity 3
Types of sentences
Materials required
Notebook, pen
Procedure
• With the same pairs as above, make a list of minimum eight sentences. These should have at least two sentences of each type—declarative, interrogative, exclamatory and imperative.
• For each type of sentence, different volunteers read out their sentences to the class. The class gives feedback on the correctness of the sentences.
A. Multiple choice questions
Read the questions carefully and circle the letter (a), (b), (c) or (d) that best answers the question.
1. Identify the subject in the sentence, “The children played football.” (a) The children (b) Children played (c) Played (d) Football
2. Identify the object in the sentence, “The children played football.” (a) The children (b) Children played (c) Played (d) Football
Check You Process
Unit 1.indd 31 24-08-2018 15:24:25
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 32
3. Which of these sentences has both indirect and direct objects?
(a) I am watching TV.
(b) She bought a blue pen.
(c) The girls played cricket.
(d) He wrote his sister a letter.
4. Which of these sentences is in passive voice?
(a) They are watching a movie.
(b) The clock was repaired by Raju.
(c) He is sleeping in the room.
(d) My pet dog bit the postman.
B. Short answer questions
1. Write one sentence of each type—statement, question, exclamatory and order.
2. Which is your favourite festival? Write two paragraphs about your favourite festival. Each paragraph should have a minimum of four sentences. Make sure you follow all the rules about sentences and paragraphs you have learnt.
3. Practice speaking correct sentences with your classmates. Try and find the parts of sentences which you use commonly.
What Have You Learnt?
After completing this session, you will be able to
• identify the different parts of a sentence.
• differentiate between active and passive voice.
• identify and compose different types of sentences.
S eSSIon 6: PronuncIatIon baSIcS
If we do not say (or pronounce) words correctly, others cannot understand what we are saying as in the example shown in Figure 1.13. In this lesson you will learn about the common ‘sounds’ used while speaking English. You will learn and practice how to say common words correctly.
Pronunciation is the way you say a word, just as spelling is how you write a word.
To communicate well when you speak, you need to know how to pronounce words correctly.
Correct pronunciation will help you express Figure 1.13: Importance of Pronunciation
Unit 1.indd 32 24-08-2018 15:24:25
CommuniCation SkillS 33 yourself in a clear and confident manner. It will also help others to understand your words easily.
Speaking correctly
Say the following words aloud. Ask your teacher and friends if you pronounced them correctly.
Your World Chair Wear
Also try saying these words aloud
Sun Son Sail Sale Tail Tale
What did you notice? Sometimes words, which have similar spellings are pronounced differently.
Sometimes words, which have different spellings may be pronounced in the same way. The best way to learn correct pronunciation of words is to listen carefully.
Phonetics
How do we pronounce words? We use sounds to speak.
Every word is made up of one or more sounds. We put these sounds together to pronounce words. Phonetics is the study of the sounds that we make when we speak.
For example, the word dog is made of three sounds put together: d-o-g. Speak the word aloud as shown in
Hindi to help you pronounce it correctly
The word cat is made of three other sounds: c-a-t.
Speak the word aloud as shown in Hindi to help you pronounce it correctly . The English alphabet has 26 letters, from A to Z. But each of these letters can be pronounced in different ways in different words. We use 26 letters to write in English. But, we use more than 26 sounds when we speak English.
This is why a word’s spelling does not always match its pronunciation.
Let us take the letter ‘a’ for example. Read the words below aloud. The alphabet ‘a’ is pronounced differently in different words as shown in Table 1.15.
Table 1.15: Different sounds of letter ‘a’
Words Pronunciation of the letter ‘a’
Pronunciation in cat, apple and back ऐ कैट, एेपल, बैक
Unit 1.indd 33 24-08-2018 15:24:25
