E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 34 car, fast and park आ कार, फासट, पाक्क call, ball and saw आॅ कॉल, बॉल, सॉव्
Pay attention to the sound of each word while listening, you will be able to pronounce it clearly.
Types of sounds
We have now seen how the letters of the alphabet are not enough to exactly match the many different sounds we make when we speak. Let us take a closer look at the sounds we use. All English words are made of three basic types of sounds as shown in Table 1.16.
Table 1.16: Different Sounds in English
Vowels Diphthongs (combination sound of two vowels) Consonants
The English alphabet has five vowels (a, e, i, o and u)
but 12 vowel sounds. This means most vowels can be pronounced in different ways. We make a vowel sound when we read a vowel in a word.
We make a diphthong sound when we combine two vowels.
Diphthongs start as one vowel sound and go to another.
A consonant sound is any sound that is neither a vowel nor a diphthong
For example, we pronounce the letter ‘i’ in the word ‘bit’ by using a vowel sound.
In Hindi it is िबट
For example, the sound ‘ou’ in the word “house” is a diphthong or a combination.
In Hindi, it is हाऊस
For example, we use consonant sounds to say the letters ‘p’ and ‘t’ in the word Pot. In Hindi is पॉट
Say the word ‘bit’ aloud and listen to how you are saying the vowel sound.
Say the word ‘house’ aloud and listen to how you are saying the diphthong.
Say the word ‘pot’ aloud and listen to how you are saying the consonant
Some more examples are given in Table 1.17. Say these words aloud (also given in Hindi to assist pronunciation), listen carefully when others say these words and repeat what you hear.
Unit 1.indd 34 24-08-2018 15:24:25
CommuniCation SkillS 35
Table 1.17: Examples of Different Sounds
Vowel Sounds long ‘ee’ sound short ‘i’ sound short ‘u’ sound long ‘oo’ sound
Sleep सललीप Slip िसलप Book बुक Boot बुट
Keep कीप Dip िनयर Put पुट Group ग्रू प
Feel फील Fill िफल Foot फुट Two टरू
Combination vowel (diphthong’) sounds
‘ea’ sound ‘ae’ sound ‘oa’ sound ‘ou’ sound
Near िनयर Late लेट Boat बोट Mouth माउथ
Deer िडयर Cake केक Loan लोन Cow काउ
Hear हलीयर Game गेम Most मोसट Cloud कलाउड
Consonant sounds
‘p प’ sound ‘t ट’ sound ‘k क’ sound ‘l ल’ sound
Pen पेन Train ट्े न Book बुक Look लुक
Report िरपोट्क Story सटोरली Cold कोलड Place पलेस
Stop सटोप Put पुट Music मयरूिसक School सकरूल
The teacher will facilitate these activities by showing you the e-learning module for this lesson via http://www.
psscive.ac.in/Employability_Skills.html. The module will include videos and e-content for the above topics as well as detailed instructions for some activities below.
Activity 1
Pronouncing words
Materials required
Notebook, pen
Procedure
• Form groups of four students in each group.
• Make a list of five things in the classroom.
• Identify the vowels, diphthongs and consonants in the listed words.
• Each student speaks each word aloud in the group and the others say if it is the right pronunciation.
Unit 1.indd 35 24-08-2018 15:24:26
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 36
Activity 2
Pronouncing words
Materials required
Notebook, pen
Procedure
• Form pairs of students. Your teacher will give you a list of words.
• Practice saying these words aloud with your partner, who says if it is correct or not.
• A volunteer reads out two words for the whole class who will give feedback on the correctness of the pronunciation.
Check Your Progress
A. Multiple choice questions
Read the questions carefully and circle the letter (a), (b), (c) or (d) that best answers the question.
1. What is phonetics?
(a) It is the study of how we write words in English.
(b) It is the study of how people understand sentences.
(c) It is the study of how many words the English language has.
(d) It is the study of the sounds we make when we speak.
2. What are the different types of sounds used in English pronunciation?
(a) Vowel sounds (b) Diphthong sounds (c) Consonant sounds (d) All of the above
What Have You Learnt?
After completing this session, you will be able to
• describe what pronunciation is.
• pronounce (speak correctly) simple words used in your conversations.
S eSSIon 7: greetIngS and IntroductIonS
We use certain words called ‘greetings’ before we start talking to friends, people familiar to us, or people whom we are meeting for the first time. Also we use certain sentences to tell about ourselves or others, to people who do not know us. This is called an Introduction.
Unit 1.indd 36 24-08-2018 15:24:26
CommuniCation SkillS 37
Greetings
There are many ways to greet a person. The greeting and reply to a greeting at work is different from the greeting and reply given to a friend. Similarly, there are many ways to say goodbye when you depart.
The greetings change depending upon who we are talking to and even according to the time of the day.
Greetings help us start a conversation nicely as shown in Figure 1.14.
Types of greetings
There are two ways of greeting as shown in Figure 1.15.
Say the greetings below a loud.
Formal greetings are used if you do not know the person. It is used to greet senior, elderly people or people with whom we have formal relations like teachers or customers. This is used more often in schools, colleges and offices.
Figure 1.14: Greetings and
Introductions
Figure 1.15: Formal and Informal Greetings
Say a loud the formal greetings and replies given in
Table 1.18.
Table 1.18: Formal Greetings
Greeting Reply
Good morning everybody! Good morning, Ma’am!
Good morning, Sir! Good morning, everyone!
Hello Sir. How are you? Very well. Thank you! How are
How are you Tina? I’m doing well. How are you, Sir?
Unit 1.indd 37 24-08-2018 15:24:26
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 38
Informal greetings are used when you talk to friends, family or a known person.
Say out loud the informal greetings/replies given in
Table 1.19.
Table 1.19: Informal Greetings
Greeting Reply
Hey! Hello or Hi!
Hey! How are you doing? Hi! I am doing great!
Hi! Good to meet you.
We can also greet people according to the time of the day when we meet them. Say out loud the greetings given in Table 1.20.
Figure 1.16: Introducing Yourself
Table 1.20: Greetings According to Time
Time Greeting
From early morning to 11.59 am Good morning
12 pm to about 5 pm (afternoon
Good afternoon
5 pm to midnight Good evening (We usually do not greet people by saying
Good night even if it is night. We say Good night at the end of conversation.)
Introducing yourself and others
When you are meeting someone for the first time, or if others want to know about you, you need to ‘Introduce’ yourself. You can do this by telling your name and some general information like about your hometown, your job or subjects as a student, your interests, etc. When introducing yourself, remember to look at the other person and smile. Some examples are shown here in Figure 1.16.
Unit 1.indd 38 24-08-2018 15:24:26
