CommuniCation SkillS 39
We can introduce someone to others by telling their name, what they do, how we know them, or even by describing something interesting about them. One example is shown here in Figure 1.17.
The teacher will facilitate these activities by showing you the e-learning module for this lesson via http://www.psscive.ac.in/
Employability_Skills.html. The module will include videos and e-content for the above topics as well as detailed instructions for some activities below.
Initial thinking activity
Have you come across such a situation? Based on the initial videos in the e-learning lesson for this topic, write down how do you think we start talking to friends and neighbours? How can we start a conversation politely?
Activity 1
Formal and informal greetings
Materials required
Notebook, pen
Procedure
• Form pairs of students.
• Each pair should write about two conversations—one with formal greetings and one with informal greetings and act it out.
• One volunteer pair acts this out in front of the class.
• The class says if the formal and informal greetings have been used correctly.
Activity 2
Introducing someone
Materials required
Notebook, pen
Procedure
• Use same pairs of students as above.
• Each pair should write a conversation to introduce someone to their friends and family and act it out.
• One volunteer pair demonstrates it for the class.
• The class says if the introductions have been made correctly.
Figure 1.17: Introducing
Unit 1.indd 39 24-08-2018 15:24:26
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 40
A. Multiple choice questions
Read the questions carefully and circle the letter (a), (b), (c) or (d) that best answers the question.
1. You say ‘Good Morning’ when it is _______________.
(a) 11 am (b) 9 am (c) 8 am (d) All (a), (b) and (c)
2. You may say ‘Hi’ when you meet _______________.
(a) your teacher in class (b) a senior in the office (c) your Principal (d) your friends at a shop
3. You say ‘Good Afternoon’ when it is ______________.
(a) 10 am (b) 11.59 am (c) 6 pm (d) 1 pm
4. You say ‘Good Evening’ when it is ______________.
(a) 11 am (b) 9 am (c) 2 pm (d) 7 pm
B. Short answer questions
2. Write two to three lines you would use to introduce yourself.
noteS Activity 3
Greetings
Materials required
Notebook, pen
Procedure
• Imagine that you are at home. The doorbell rings and you open the door. Write down.
• What would you say when you see your uncle standing at the door?
• What would you say when you see your friend standing at the door?
• One volunteer acts it out in front of the class. The class (with teacher) discusses
• What is the difference in the way you greet your friends and teachers?
• Which method will be used in the following situations:
(a) While talking to teacher in the classroom, and (b)
While talking to your friends in the playground.
• What are the different phrases used when greeting friends?
• What are the phrases used when greeting elders, teachers, colleagues at work or in office?
Check Your Progress
Unit 1.indd 40 24-08-2018 15:24:26
CommuniCation SkillS 41
What Have You Learnt?
S eSSIon 8: talkIng about Self
You may need to talk about yourself on many occasions especially when you meet new people. You may also need to fill forms with information about yourself. In this session you will learn how to describe (or ‘introduce’)
yourself and write about yourself.
Talking about yourself
When you meet someone for the first time, they may want to know more about you. You will need to ‘introduce’ yourself by telling them about yourself as shown in Figure 1.18.
You usually start by telling your name. Then you can talk about other things, such as what you do, your age, where you live, or even about the things or activities that you like or dislike. For all these sentences, you will use nouns and verbs.
A noun is a ‘naming’ word that is used for a person, place, thing, or idea.
Some examples of nouns are Ali, Delhi, football and
A verb is a ‘doing’ word that tells us what the noun does. Some examples of verbs are play, like, eat and write. Note that some verbs with an ‘ing’ ending can also act as nouns. Swimming is an example. We can talk about likes and dislikes using nouns as well as verbs that end with ‘ing’. For example, cycling and swimming.
Table 1.21 represents talking about oneself. Read
Figure 1.18: Talking About Self
History.
Class IX.
After completing this session, you will be able to
• greet people formally and informally.
• introduce yourself to other people.
• introduce other people to your friends.
Unit 1.indd 41 24-08-2018 15:24:26
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 42
Table 1.21: Talking About Yourself
Name I am Harish Sethi. My name is Anu. I am Lucy Peter. My name is Ali.
What they
I am in high
I am a student. I play cricket. I practice karate.
Age I am 15 years old. I am 16 and a half years old.
I am nine. I will be 17 soon.
Hometown I stay in Agra. I live in Mumbai. I am from Goa. I’m from Patna.
Likes I like playing
I like swimming. I like carpentry. I like music.
Dislikes I dislike summers. I do not like dolls. I dislike loud
I do not like playing football.
Strengths I can write stories very well.
I am a good public speaker.
I can solve crossword puzzles quickly.
I am a good team
Weaknesses I leave tasks incomplete .
I get angry easily. I cannot manage my time properly.
I am nervous to speak in front of a large group.
Filling a form
Sometimes, instead of talking, you will have to write about yourself in a form. A form is a typed or printed page with blank spaces for information.
Each form is different, so you should read it properly before filling. Write neatly taking care to use the correct spellings. A form usually has the following fields for personal information as shown in Table 1.22.
Table 1.22: Some fields a form
Name Here you enter your name. Sometimes you may need to write the first, middle (if any) and surname.
Date of birth This is the date on which you were born. It is usually written as the day, followed by the month, followed by the year in numerals.
Address This is the postal address which includes your house number and the details of the street, area and the city.
PIN code This is a group of numbers used by the post office to identify a region. It is an important part of an address.
Signature (or Sign) This is your name or initials written by hand, in a specific way (which is difficult for anyone else to copy).
Unit 1.indd 42 24-08-2018 17:03:27
