CommuniCation SkillS 47
Activity 1
Framing questions
Materials required
Notebook, pen
Procedure
• Form groups of four students in each group.
• Tell the students about a situation. Use the 5W+1H method to make a list of questions that should be asked to get complete information.
• One volunteer group reads out the list to the class. The rest of the students give feedback if these were right questions.
Activity 2
Framing questions
Materials required
Notebook, pen
Procedure
• Form pairs of students.
• Your teacher will tell you about a situation for which you have to make plans.
• Make a list of questions you will ask. Also, think and write why you need to ask that question. (What is the purpose of the question?).
• Read out your list to your partner and discuss if each other’s questions were right.
Activity 3
Let us guess!
Procedure
• Divide the class into five groups.
• Each group discusses and decides on one famous personality.
• All groups will take turns to ask other group questions and guess the person.
• Every group gets to ask one question each to other groups.
In total, each group can ask three questions. If they are not able to guess within the first three questions, extend the number of questions to five per group.
• If you run out of questions, tell each team to give the teams a CLUE.
• For example, for Mahatma Gandhi, the clue can be:
• He is called the Father of the Nation
• He was a lawyer from Gujarat
• His picture is on Indian rupee notes
• After spending about five minutes preparing in their groups, give the teacher examples of the kind of questions prepared.
Unit 1.indd 47 24-08-2018 15:24:26
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 48
A. Multiple choice questions
Read the questions carefully and circle the letter (a), (b), (c) or (d) that best answers the question.
1. Raju is the class monitor. He wants to know why
Ramesh is coming late every day. Which of the following is a question that Raju can ask Ramesh?
(a) Do you come on time?
(b) Are you late?
(c) Why are you late every day?
(d) Will it not be easier to complete your work if you come on time?
2. If you have not understood a task given to you, which question should you ask?
(a) Where are the reports of this task?
(b) Can you repeat the instructions for this task?
(c) Can you give me an example of this task?
(d) Why are you doing this task?
3. Sheela does not have time so she decides to delay a task. Which question should he ask before ignoring the (a) What is this task?
(b) When does this task need to be completed?
(c) Is this task important?
(d) No need to ask any question.
4. Renuka is joining a new school. Which of the following questions will help her become comfortable with her new classmates?
(a) How long have you been studying here?
(b) Would you like to share my lunch?
(c) What do you all do in your free time?
(d) All the options are correct.
Check Your Progress
• The questions have to be indirect and anyone from the other group can answer.
• The team that guesses the other team’s famous person first, wins!
Discussion
• Were you able to frame questions?
• Were you able to identify the right kind of question?
Practice work
Whenever you are starting with a new work think of all the information you would need. Use the 5W+1H method to make a list of questions to get all this information. If you keep practicing on you will be able to frame questions.
Unit 1.indd 48 24-08-2018 15:24:26
CommuniCation SkillS 49
B. Short answer questions
1. Re-arrange the words to form questions.
a) she/like/sing?/Does/to b) waiting/What/are/you/for?
c) play/like/football?/Do/ d) fighting?/they/are/Why
What Have You Learnt?
After completing this session, you will be able to
• ask questions to get correct information from other
• ask the questions according to a situation.
S eSSIon 10: aSkIng QueStIonS II
A question is a sentence, phrase, or word that either asks for information or is used to test someone’s knowledge. We always use a question mark (?) at the end of a question. In our day-to-day interactions with others, we often have to ask and answer questions to get information. Asking the correct questions can help us get the information we want as shown in Figure 1.21.
Types of questions
There are two basic types of questions: close-ended and open-ended.
Figure 1.21: Questions and
Information
Unit 1.indd 49 24-08-2018 15:24:26
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 50
Questions that can be answered with a “yes” or a
“no” are called close-ended question. That is because the answer options are limited or closed. For example, when we ask “Do you have a TV at home?”, the answer could be either “Yes” or “No” (see Figure 1.22).
Sometimes, when we ask a question, we expect an answer with more details. For example in Figure 1.23 when we ask “What do you like to watch on TV?”, the answer could be “I like to watch movies on TV.” These are called open-ended questions because their answer options are not limited or closed. In this case, the person could have also said sports, news, or anything else.
Framing (or forming) questions
Framing close-ended questions
We can form close-ended questions by adding helping verbs (called auxiliary verbs) like Be, Do and Have. These convey additional information, such as time and mood.
Besides these, there are other auxiliary verbs (called modal verbs), such as Can, Shall, May, Should, Could which show possibility or necessity. One method of framing close-ended questions is to take a sentence without the above words and place such words before the subject.
For example, the sentence “I like it” can be changed into a close-ended question by adding the word “do” before the subject “I”. This creates the close-ended question: “Do I like it?”
Read aloud the other examples are shown in Table 1.24.
Table 1.24: Close-ended Questions
Sentence Close-ended questions after adding helping verbs
They talk on the phone every day. Do they talk on the phone every day?
You share your lunch with your friends.
Could you share your lunch with your friends?
Please Note: The helping verb changes based on the subject, but the main verb remains unchanged. For example, in the sentences and the questions below, the main verb (cook) remains unchanged, but the auxiliary verb (do) changes based on the subject. Read aloud the other examples are shown here in Table 1.25.
Figure 1.22: Open-ended
Question
Figure 1.23: Close-ended
Question
Unit 1.indd 50 24-08-2018 15:24:26
CommuniCation SkillS 51
Table 1.25: Close-ended Questions with Helping Verbs
Sentence Close-ended Questions after adding helping verbs
I cook dinner. Do I cook dinner?
She can cook dinner. Can she cook dinner?
They cook dinner. Do they cook dinner?
Framing close-ended questions
In some cases, we exchange the positions of the subject and the verb to create a close-ended question.
We can follow a similar method for sentences that already have auxiliary verbs. Read aloud the other examples given in Table 1.26.
Table 1.26: Close-ended Questions (Subject/Verb exchanged)
Sentence Close-ended questions after exchanging positions of the subject and the verb
He is there. Is he there?
They were cleaning their room. Were they cleaning their room?
You can help me. Can you help me?
Framing open-ended questions: Using question
Some questions are called open-ended because their answers are not limited or closed. They have to be answered with more information than just a “yes” or a “no”. We can form open-ended questions by using question words, such as What, Why, Who, How, When and Where. Read aloud the other examples are shown here in Table 1.27. Notice how these questions CANNOT be answered with a “yes” or a “no”.
Table 1.27: Open-ended Questions with Question Words
Open-ended questions Answer sentence
What did you do? I went to the park.
Why did you go there? I went to meet my friend.
How did you go? I cycled.
Unit 1.indd 51 24-08-2018 15:24:27
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 52
A. Multiple choice questions
Read the questions carefully and circle the letter (a), (b), (c) or (d) that best answers the question.
1. What are close-ended questions?
(a) Questions that can have any answer (b) Questions that do not have answers (c) Questions with yes/no answers (d) Questions that have many answers
Check Your Progress
The teacher will facilitate these activities by showing you the e-learning module for this lesson via http://www.psscive.ac.in/
Employability_Skills.html. The module will include videos and e-content for the above topics as well as detailed instructions for some activities below.
Activity 1
Pair-work: Framing open-ended and closed-ended questions
Materials required
Notebook, pen
Procedure
• Form pairs of students. Each pair writes five open-ended and five closed-ended questions along with the answers for all 10 questions.
• When all pairs have completed the activity, one volunteer pair reads out their questions and answers to the whole
• The class gives its feedback on whether the questions are framed correctly or not.
Activity 2
Group-practice: Framing questions
Materials required
Notebook, pen
Procedure
• Form groups of four students each.
• Write a conversation between four people, with at least six questions (including closed- and open-ended questions).
Act it out aloud.
• One group volunteers to act it in front of the class. The other students say if the questions were framed correctly.
Unit 1.indd 52 24-08-2018 15:24:27
