CommuniCation SkillS 53
2. Which of these are open-ended questions?
(a) Where do you live?
(b) Are you hungry?
(c) How do you feel?
(d) Did you meet him?
3. Which of these are question words?
(a) What (b) Want (c) Which
4. Which of these is the correct way to convert the sentence
“You are studying” into a question?
(a) You are studying?
(b) Studying you are?
(c) Are you studying?
(d) Studying are you?
B. Short answer questions
Make a note of five questions your friends asked you.
How many were open-ended questions? Make a list of five close-ended questions you asked other people in one day.
gloSSary
Auxiliary verbs: verbs used along with a main verb to convey additional information, such as time and mood. There are three main auxiliary verbs ‘Be, Do and Have’
Coherent: making sense, related to the main topic
Communication: sharing of information between two or more people to reach a common understanding
Concise: using simple words and saying only what is needed, not
Concrete: using exact words and facts
Courteous: showing respect, polite, friendly
Exclamation: a sudden cry or remark expressing surprise, emotion,
What Have You Learnt?
After completing this session, you will be able to
• ask simple questions to solve your doubts.
• identify close-ended and open-ended questions.
• use the correct question words to ask open-ended and close-ended questions.
Unit 1.indd 53 24-08-2018 15:24:27
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 54
Instead: as an alternative, another option
Modal Verbs: these are other auxiliary verbs, such as ‘Can, May and Should’
Modify: make partial or minor changes to something
Paralanguage: the other parts of spoken language (besides words)
tone, rate, loudness, etc.
Posture: the position of the body when standing, sitting or working
Precise words: exact, most suitable words
Similar: looking same in appearance, character, or quantity, but not identical
Specific words: special, correct name
Studio: a place where films are made or produced
Title: a name that describes someone’s position or job further readIngS
Session 1: Introduction to Communication
• https://bit.ly/2yrCswn
• https://bit.ly/2GPRn8A
Session 4: Writing Skills 1 – Parts Of Speech
• http://www.thepunctuationguide.com/top-ten.html
• https://bit.ly/2ImnVUS
Session 5: Writing Skills2 – Sentences
• https://bit.ly/2EepS38
Session 6: Pronunciation Basics
• https://bit.ly/1HkctUu
Session 7: Greetings and Introductions
• h t t p s : / / w w w . t h o u g h t c o . c o m / g r e e t i n g - p e o p l e - i n - english-1212039
• https://reallifeglobal.com/23-different-ways-greet- someone-english/
Session 8: Talking About Self
• https://bit.ly/2H3UjML
Session 9: Asking QuestionsI
• http://www.englishlearnsite.com/grammar/wh-questions/
• https://bit.ly/2IklgeA
Unit 1.indd 54 24-08-2018 15:24:27
IntroductIon
Self-management, which is also referred to as ‘self- control’ or ‘self-regulation’, is the ability to regulate one’s emotions, thoughts, and behaviour effectively in different situations. This includes motivating oneself, and setting and working towards personal and academic goals. Students with strong self-management skills are able to do different activities effectively, including managing their timelines, focusing on their tasks, cooperating with others in school and at home and perform better in their studies. It helps in future studies, work and life.
S eSSIon 1: I ntroductIon to S elf -management
After writing an exam, have you ever felt that you should have studied more? Do you think that you could manage your hobbies, interests, and studies better if you could manage your time well?
Self-management involves understanding yourself, understanding what your interests and abilities are,
Unit Unit
Self-Management
Unit 2.indd 55 23-08-2018 17:04:01
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 56
Self-awareness
Knowing yourself as an individual – your values, likes, dislikes, strengths and weaknesses
Self-control
Ability to control your behaviour, discipline, etc.
Self-confidence
Believing in yourself that you can do any task that is given to you and not scared of taking risks
Problem solving
Understanding a problem and finding a solution using step-by-step
Self-motivation
Doing tasks on your own without any external motivation
Personal hygiene and grooming
Keeping oneself clean, healthy and
Positive thinking
Expressing certainty or affirmation even in tough situations
Team work
Working together with people to accomplish shared having a positive attitude and grooming yourself in order to develop self-confidence (See Figure 2.1).
Self-management can also help in:
• developing good habits
• overcoming bad habits
• reaching your goals
• overcoming challenges and difficulties
Being able to manage yourself helps you to avoid stress and provides opportunities to get involved in fun activities.
Self-management skills include the following:
Figure 2.1: Who Am I?
Fig. 2.2: Self-awareness Fig. 2.3: Self-control
Fig. 2.4: Self-confidence
Fig. 2.6: Self-motivation
Fig. 2.7: Hygiene and grooming
Fig. 2.9: Teamwork Fig. 2.8: Positive Thinking
Fig. 2.5: Problem Solving
Unit 2.indd 56 23-08-2018 17:04:02
