S elf -management SkillS 57
The practical activities will be facilitated by the teacher and necessary feedback will be provided by the teachers to the students.
Activity 1
Self-management skills
Materials required
Student textbooks, pen
Procedure
Read the following paragraph. Write in class. One volunteer can read what he/she wrote and other students can discuss.
“Manish got admission to a new school. His clothes were not clean, shoes were not polished and laces were not tied. He did not smile at anyone and looked sad. He did not look confident.
What are the qualities of self-management that you think are missing in Manish?”
Activity 2
How self-aware are you?
Materials required
Student textbooks, pen
Procedure
• Form pairs of students who are friends or know each other
• The students to rate each other on the scale of ‘Good’,
‘OK’ or ‘Bad’, on self-management skills given in the table
My friend’s name
……………………
Self-management skill My rating of my ability
My friend’s rating of my ability management
Achieving tasks on time and according the plan
Goal setting
Planning concrete goals to be accomplished within a set timeframe.
Fig. 2.10: Time management Fig. 2.11: Goal setting
Unit 2.indd 57 23-08-2018 17:04:03
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 58
Confident (Self- confidence)
Positive and Cheerful (Positive Thinking)
Neat and Clean (Personal Hygiene and
Grooming)
On-time (Punctuality)
• Rate your partner on the same rating scale and skills.
• Compare what you thought of yourself and what your partner thought of you. If it is the same, than it means that you are aware of your skills. If the ratings are different, you can discuss why the partner thought about you differently.
A. Multiple choice questions
Read the questions carefully and circle the letter (a), (b), (c) or (d) that best answers the question.
1. Which of the following is not a self-management skill?
(a) Problem solving (b) Bargaining (c) Understanding self (d) Confidence building
2. Grooming is a term associated with (a) time management (b) problem solving (c) neat and clean appearance (d) self-management
B. Short answer questions
1. Write a short note on the factors influencing self- management.
2. List any 05 self-management skills.
3. Draw an outline of your right hand and label each finger with different factors that influence you in managing yourself.
Check Your Progress
Unit 2.indd 58 23-08-2018 17:04:03
S elf -management SkillS 59
Examples of strength
• I am good at understanding other peoples emotion.
• I am confident in dealing with strangers while keeping myself safe from any harm.
• I help my parents in household chores.
• I play cricket very well.
Examples of weakness
• I am unable to resist junk food when my friends suggest.
• I would like to learn more about computers.
After completing this session, you will be able to
• describe self-management in your own words.
• describe the importance of self-management.
• list the various self-management skills.
What have you learnt?
S eSSIon 2: S trength and
W eakneSS analySIS
Have you ever wondered why you get good marks in one subject and not so good in another subject? Knowing what you do well or not so well, will help you in converting your weaknesses into strengths and strengths into an exceptional performance. The strength and weakness analysis helps you in this process. Strength and weakness analysis begins with knowing yourself first.
Knowing yourself
It means understanding who you are, what you like, what you do not like, what are your beliefs, what are your opinions, what is your background, what you do well and what you do not do well? It is important to know who you are, because only then can you measure your strengths and weaknesses (See Figure 2.12).
Strength and weakness analysis
Being ‘self-aware’ or understanding ‘Who am I?’ means looking outside our usual characteristics, such as our name, qualifications, and the relationship we have with others. It actually means knowing our inner strengths, hidden talents, skills and even weaknesses. Let us look at what could be our strengths and weaknesses.
Figure 2.12: Knowing Yourself
Unit 2.indd 59 23-08-2018 17:04:04
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 60
Identifying strengths
• Take time off to think about what you
• Think of anything that you are always
• Think about what others appreciate about you
Identifying weaknesses
• Point out the areas where you struggle and what you find difficult to do
• Look at the feedback you receive from
• Be open to feedback and accept your weaknesses without feeling small about it. Look at it as an area of improvement.
Fig. 2.14: Identifying Strength and
Weaknesses
Strengths are what we do well and are good at.
Everyone has some strengths.
Weaknesses, also known as 'areas of improvement' are what we do not do well and are not good at. Everyone has some weaknesses too.
Fig. 2.13: Strength and Weakness
By understanding ourselves we can
• know what we can and cannot do
Based on that information, we can
• plan what and how we can improve ourselves
By improving
• feel confident about ourselves
Unit 2.indd 60 23-08-2018 17:04:06
S elf -management SkillS 61
Here are few questions that can help you find your strengths and weaknesses (Figure 2.15).
Difference between interests and abilities
Interests are the things that we enjoy doing. Interests may include:
• Activities you like to do at school and in your free time that make you happy.
• Activities you are curious about or would do even if no one asked you to do it.
• Activities you want to learn or would like to do in the future.
Ability, on the other hand, is an acquired or natural capacity that enables an individual to perform a particular job or task with considerable proficiency.
Sometimes interests may not match abilities. In those cases, you can either improve your abilities or follow some other path. For example, you may like cricket (interest), but you may not be able to play due to the necessary power or skill (ability) required to play the game . In that case, it is not necessary to try to become a cricketer!
The teacher will facilitate these activities by showing you the e-learning module for this lesson via http://www.psscive.ac.in/
Employability_Skills.html. The module will include videos and e-content for the above topics as well as detailed instructions for some activities below.
• How am I different from others?
• What do I do better than others?
• What do other people admire in me?
• What makes me stand out?
• Where do I worry and struggle?
• Where, how and why do others perform better than me?
• What advice for improvement do I often receive from others?
Figure 2.15: Finding Strength and Weakness
Unit 2.indd 61 23-08-2018 17:04:07
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 62
After watching the initial video in the e-learning lesson, write down the points that you will use from the video to understand your own strengths and weaknesses.
Activity 1
Aim in life
Materials required
Pen/pencil, notepad or sheets of paper
Procedure
• Form pairs of students. Make a list of tasks/activities you can do well.
• Write your main aim in life.
• Share your notes with your partner and discuss your personal characteristics.
• Fill in the table given below
List what you believe as a person by starting the sentences with
‘I am’ (I am a sensitive person).
List all you can do well by starting the sentences with
‘I can’ (I can identify safety aspects and seek support when witnessing or experiencing violence and abuse).
List what you plan to do by starting the sentences with ‘I will’ (I will train myself in yoga).
State your aim in life. Start the sentence with ‘My aim is’ (My aim is to become an accomplished sportsperson).
Activity 2
Interests and abilities
Materials required
Student textbooks, pen, worksheets
Procedure
Each student has to complete two worksheets, each containing a list of statements. First worksheet is for interests and the second is for abilities. Each student has to be real and honest when marking the statements in the two worksheets if he/she is not real and honest, they will get incorrect results about their own interests and abilities.
Unit 2.indd 62 23-08-2018 17:04:07
S elf -management SkillS 63
WorkSheet 1: What are my IntereStS?
Group 1: Interests
1. I enjoy working with a group of people.
2. I love to make new friends.
3. I feel comfortable around new people.
4. I like listening to people who have thoughts different than mine.
5. I like to report the problems in my locality to the Municipality/Panchayat.
6. I like responding to people enthusiastically.
7. I like organising events.
8. I want to resolve conflicts between people.
Group 2: Interests
1. I like working with tools.
2. I enjoy making things with my own hands.
3. I like to move around a lot.
4. I like to use gestures and non-verbal cues when I communicate.
5. I like to learn by doing.
6. I like playing sports everyday.
7. I like assembling parts of instruments or machine using instructions.
Unit 2.indd 63 23-08-2018 17:04:07
