E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 64
Group 3: Interests
1. I enjoy learning about numbers.
2. I like to do experiments at home.
3. I want my things to be organised.
4. I like to see a pattern or logic in things that happen around me.
5. I like to save out of my pocket money.
6. I enjoy collecting coins/stamps.
7. I like to make and follow a plan.
Group 4: Interests
1. I like giving directions to people.
2. I want to learn new concepts and express my ideas visually.
3. I enjoy creating new product designs.
4. I prefer pictures over text in a magazine.
5. I enjoy drawing.
6. I like solving jigsaw/visual puzzles.
7. I like redecorating the room for fun.
8. I enjoy working with different colours.
WorkSheet 1: What are my abIlItIeS?
Group 1: Abilities
1. I can resolve problems between friends.
Unit 2.indd 64 23-08-2018 17:04:07
S elf -management SkillS 65
2. People seek my advice.
3. I am good at organising events.
4. People call me a good listener.
5. I make new friends easily.
6. I can work with a group of people.
Group 2: Abilities
1. I am good at athletics/sports.
2. I am physically active.
3. I learn better by doing.
4. I have a sense of balance and coordination.
5. I can assemble parts of an instrument or machine by following instructions.
6. I work well with tools.
7. I use a lot of gestures and non-verbal cues to communicate.
8. I can make things using my hands.
9. I move around a lot.
Group 3: Abilities
1. I plan my activities for the day.
2. I keep my things in an order.
3. I see logic in things that happen around
4. I save some percentage of my pocket money.
5. I conduct a variety of experiments at home.
6. I can quickly calculate the total of a list.
7. I follow a step-by-step approach to solve problems.
Unit 2.indd 65 23-08-2018 17:04:07
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 66
Group 4: Abilities
1. I am good at solving jigsaw/visual puzzles.
2. I can give clear and precise directions.
3. I draw well.
4. I look at pictures in the magazine than reading the text.
5. I learn concepts and express my ideas visually.
6. I can arrange a room for various occasions.
7. I can make models.
Check Your Progress
What have you learnt?
After completing this session, you will be able to
• list your own strengths and weaknesses.
• list your interests.
• list your abilities.
S eSSIon 3: Self -confIdence
Self-confidence is a sense of trusting own’s abilities and self. If you are an intelligent, hardworking and
Fill in the table given below which can help you to prepare an action plan to overcome your weakness. Identify and list the activities that you would like to undertake to improve upon your weaknesses and continue to build your strengths.
Strengths Weaknesses Action plan to overcome your weaknesses
For example,
I can speak languages
For example,
I do not understand computers
Improve on computer skills by attending extra classes after school.
Unit 2.indd 66 23-08-2018 17:04:07
S elf -management SkillS 67 talented person, but lack confidence, and avoid taking initiative, then it may be difficult for others to recognise your talent. Self-confidence can be developed through changes in attitude and practice.
Self-confidence is a quality we build when we believe in our strength to succeed in anything we do in life. People who are confident believe that they can do anything given to them in any situation.
Qualities of self-confident people
Self-belief
Thomas Edison made thousands of prototypes of the incandescent light bulb, before he could finally invent the bulb. Inspite of struggling with repeated failures, his resilience and belief in self gave the world one of the most amazing product, i.e., bulb.
Hard Work
Dipa Karmakar, despite having a flat foot at the age of six worked hard to be- come the first Indi- an female gymnast ever to compete in the Olympics.
Positive Attitude
Positive attitude is nothing but focusing on the positives even in the time of adversity.
For example, the situation of losing a game can be perceived as losing something or as an opportunity to review the game strategies and improve to win in the future.
Commitment
Mahatma Gandhi, the leader of Indian
Independence
Movement, was highly committed to the cause of making India free from the British
Raj. He employed non-violent civil disobedience to get
India independence.
Figure 2.16: Examples of confidence and lack of confidence
Niraj had difficulty in speaking English.
He, therefore, avoided talking to his classmates. He believed that he can learn English by joining English speaking classes and in few days he was able to speak english fluently.
Shalini, was preparing for her final board exams. She feared that she will not get good marks in English because of her poor memory.
This made her nervous before the exam and she actually got poor marks in the
Unit 2.indd 67 23-08-2018 17:04:08
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 68
Building self-confidence
The three steps to building self-confidence are as follows:
Figure 2.17: Building Confidence
Given below are some factors that decrease self- confidence.
(a) When we think we cannot do a particular work.
(b) When we keep thinking of our past mistakes and feel bad about it, instead of learning from them.
(c) When we expect to be successful at the first attempt itself and do not try again.
(d) When we are surrounded by people who have a negative attitude, which is reflected in their
The teacher will facilitate these activities by showing you the e-learning module for this lesson via http://www.psscive.ac.in/
Employability_Skills.html. The module will include videos and e-content for the above topics as well as detailed instructions for some activities below.
Initial thinking activity
After watching the initial video ‘Becoming Self-confident’ in the
Unit 2.indd 68 23-08-2018 17:04:08
