S elf -management SkillS 69 e-learning lesson. Discuss how Ranjith developed confidence before his interview day.
Activity 1
Role-Play: Building self-confidence
Materials required
Pen/pencil, notepad or sheets of paper
Procedure
• Form groups of four students in each group. Choose from one of the below given situations. List the steps you would take to handle the situation confidently.
• One group volunteers to present in front of the class.
• Discuss and ensure that the three steps above are followed.
Choose from one of the below given situations.
• You have to deliver a speech on health, hygiene and cleanliness. As this is the first time you may be doing this, how will you build your confidence?
• Two of your classmates often get into fight and damage school tables. As you are the class representative, you need to talk to them to make them realise their mistake and learn how to improve upon them. What qualities and abilities do you need to do this?
• You have to a model of the school with your team in five days. How will you build confidence in your team?
Activity 2
Building confidence through positive words
Materials required
Pen/pencil, notepad or sheets of paper
Procedure
Make a list of feel-good sentences that you will say to yourself every day when you wake up in the morning and before you go to bed. For example, you can think of (a) something that you are really proud of, (b) a compliment you have received from someone that day or the previous day, (c) a learning that you had after reflecting upon your failure.
Activity 3
Practice activity: Self reflection on becoming more confident and goal driven
Unit 2.indd 69 23-08-2018 17:04:08
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 70
A. Multiple choice questions
Read the questions carefully and circle the letter (a), (b), (c) or (d) that best answers the question.
1. What steps should one take to build confidence?
(a) Set goals in life (b) Appreciate oneself for all the achievements (c) Always think positively (d) Talk to people who are confident
2. Which of the following is a quality of a self-confident (a) Patient (b) Compassionate (c) Committed (d) Passionate
B. Short answer question
1. What are the factors that affect self-confidence?
noteS Materials required
Pen/Pencil, note pad or sheets of paper
Procedure
Write down three qualities about yourself, your goals in life and your plan to achieve them.
My qualities My goals My plans
For example, I have the ability to run
100 metres race.
For example, I want to become a nationally recognised sportsperson.
For example, I will start my day by exercising and eating a balanced diet. I will regularly run in a stadium under the guidance of coach.
Check Your Progress
Unit 2.indd 70 23-08-2018 17:04:08
S elf -management SkillS 71
What have you learnt?
After completing this session, you will be able to
• describe the meaning of self-confidence.
• list the qualities of self-confident people.
• identify ways in which you can build your self- confidence.
• list factors that influence self-confidence.
S eSSIon 4: PoStIve thInkIng
What would happen if ants, one of the smallest creatures of nature, thought that they are so small that they cannot do anything? They would probably be extinct by now. But ants have never considered being small as a weakness, instead they work really hard to get through each day. An ant can lift up to 20 times its own body weight. A positive attitude to life can help us succeed like ants. Similarly, if an individual has a positive attitude towards life and its challenges, he/she can overcome them and grow positively in life and work.
Positive thinking and its importance
A person’s attitude can be considered either ‘positive’ or
‘negative’. Positive thinking requires a person to look at the good in things, observe, understand and patiently work towards improving them rather than worrying and/or looking for the bad in things.
Positive thinking leads to good results for you like
• overcoming challenges,
• making you do well or making you an energetic individual,
• helping you get better at work, and
• making you and people around you happy.
How to keep your thinking positive?
There are few simple steps to cultivate a positive attitude in life. Let us understand this with the help of the abbreviation ‘SMILE’.
Figure 2.18: Positive Thinking
Examples of negative thinking
• I did not get enough marks to choose the
Science stream. My life is ruined.
• My team lost the match because of me.
Examples of positive thinking
• I did not get enough marks to choose the Science stream, but that’s not the end of my life. I can consider options in other streams.
• My team lost the match today, but we can see how we can do better next time.
Unit 2.indd 71 23-08-2018 17:04:09
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 72
The teacher will facilitate these activities by showing you the e-learning module for this lesson via http://www.psscive.ac.in/
Employability_Skills.html. The module will include videos and e-content for the above topics as well as detailed instructions for some activities below.
Initial thinking activity
After watching the initial video in the e-learning lesson for this topic, write down what went wrong in the video?
Activity 1
Story telling:
Procedure
• Form a circle around the teacher.
• Discuss a story about
• Positive attitude
• How does the story connect to positive attitude? What role does attitude play in our lives? If you would have been in similar situations what would have been your attitude/ approach towards the situation? What kind of approach will help you come out of this situation?
Figure 2.19: SMILE model
Unit 2.indd 72 29-08-2018 11:21:13
