S elf -management SkillS 73 noteS Activity 2
Follow the Class rules
Materials required
Pen/pencil, notepad or sheets of paper
Procedure
• Form groups of three students.
• Each group prepares a role-play on the situation given below. Two people in each group act out the situation and the third member observe and makes notes on questions, such as what went well in terms of dealing with the situation positively? What could have been better?
• A volunteer group presents in front of the whole class which would be followed by discussion.
Situation
You are the monitor of your class. Some of your classmates do not follow the class rules. You have to talk to them and ask them to follow the rules.
Activity 3
Using positive words:
Materials required
Pen/pencil, notepad or sheets of paper
Procedure
• Use same groups as above. Look at the below statements and make them positive by using positive words/thinking, such as ‘I can’ instead of ‘I cannot’ (a) I cannot give speech in school assembly.
(b) I made a lot of errors in my computer work.
(c) I did not like the school project.
• Once written in notebook, discuss within your group.
Activity 4
Self-reflection on how you will follow positive attitude practices
Materials required
Pen/pencil
Procedure
• Make a list of things you will do from today to start thinking positively in your daily life.
Start your day in a positive way
Make time to relax
Imagine the best in any situation
Learn to take criticism in a healthy way
Express gratitude
Unit 2.indd 73 23-08-2018 17:04:09
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 74
A. Multiple choice questions
Read the questions carefully and circle the letter (a), (b), (c) or (d) that best answers the question.
1. What is the best way to start our day positively?
(a) Think about all that can go wrong.
(b) Think about the difficult test you will face during the day.
(c) Think about all your accomplishment so far and feel good about it.
(d) Think about the traffic on the road and feel stressed.
2. Rahul gets feedback on his project work from his class teacher. Which of these options demonstrates positive attitude in this situation?
(a) Rahul ignores the feedback.
(b) Rahul takes the feedback but does not use it.
(c) Rahul tells others that the teacher is wrong.
(d) Rahul learns from the feedback and makes his project work better.
3. What can you do to get rid of negative thoughts or feelings?
(a) Meditate to calm down and feel positive.
(b) Ignore them and move on in life.
(c) Act based on the negative thoughts or feelings.
(d) Talk to a friend and share all your negative feelings.‘
After completing this session, you will be able to
• define positive attitude.
• list the benefits of having a positive attitude.
• identify ways in which you can develop a positive attitude.
What have you learnt?
noteS Activity 5
Home activity: Helping others/working for the community
Social work makes you feel good and happy and helps you to be positive. Think of a situation that you see every day in your neighbourhood
• Dirty streets or
• A hungry cow or
• A big hole on the road
Go home and do something to help in that situation. Write what you did in your notebook and submit it to your teacher in the next period for review.
Check Your Progress
Unit 2.indd 74 23-08-2018 17:04:09
S elf -management SkillS 75
• Keep your hair free of dandruff
• Rub oil/cream to take care of your skin
• Brush your teeth daily
• Change your toothbrush as soon as it deshapes
• Cut your nails every week
• Wash your hands frequently
• Take bath every day
• Wash your clothes regularly
• Wash your hair at least every second day
• Wash your feet often
• Blow your nose/cough into a handkerchief to avoid spreading germs
• Keep your feet dry and change your socks every
S eSSIon 5: PerSonal hygIene
It is the habit or practice of keeping ourselves clean.
Cleanliness helps us to maintain our health and well-being. Being healthy allows you to be regular at school, college or work.
Personal hygiene is important because, it helps us
• stay healthy.
• create a good image of ourselves.
• avoid feeling ashamed in public due to our bad breadth, body odour, etc.
Three steps to personal hygiene
Figure 2.20: Examples of Personal Hygiene
Rashmi is a beautician and takes special care that she does not have a bad breath, because she works closely with customers.
Prashant is a receptionist at a four-star hotel.
He makes sure his clothes are always clean with no sweat or food stains.
Unit 2.indd 75 23-08-2018 17:04:10
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 76
Wet hands with water
Right palm over left dorsum and vice versa
Rotational rubbing of left thumb clasped in right palm and vice versa
Rinse hands thoroughly with water
Use towel to dry Your hands are now clean.
Rub inner surface of palms
Rub inner surface using the thumb
Palm to palm with fingers interlaced
Back of fingers to opposing palms with fingers interlocked
Apply enough soap to cover all hand surfaces
Rub hands palm
Essential steps of hand washing
The teacher will facilitate these activities by showing you the e-learning module for this lesson via http://www.psscive.ac.in/
Employability_Skills.html. The module will include videos and e-content for the above topics as well as detailed instructions for some activities given ahead.
Unit 2.indd 76 23-08-2018 17:04:10
