S elf -management SkillS 77
Initial thinking activity
After watching the initial video ‘Importance of Personal Hygiene’ in the e-learning lesson, write down your advice to a restaurant staff on CARE, WASH and AVOID.
Activity 1
Using personal hygiene steps
Materials required
Pen/pencil, notepad or sheets of paper
Procedure
• Form groups of three. Each group prepares a role-play on any one of the following situations.
• Within each group, two members act out the situation and the third member observes and makes notes on what went well, what could have been better and what parts of CARE,
WASH and AVOID were displayed in the role-play.
Situations (a) One of your classmates often gets left out from activities and games in school. He/she has body odour (bad smell) issues, so other classmates avoid including him/her in classroom activities and games. You have decided to help by talking to him/ her about personal hygiene and grooming.
(b) You have recently gone through the lesson on personal hygiene and sanitation and have understood its importance. You have a neighbour who often throws garbage in public areas and you decide to teach him/her about the importance of health, hygiene and sanitation.
(c) You are the class monitor. One of your classmates is very sick and sometimes ends up spreading the germs in the class. You have to talk to your classmate about his/her personal hygiene and cleanliness practices.
Activity 2
Personal Hygiene Practices
Materials required
Pen/pencil, writing/notepad
Procedure
• Answer the statements with a ‘Yes’ or a ‘No’. If your answer is ‘Yes’, you are already following personal hygiene standards. If your answer is ‘No’, then you have to start following the personal hygiene standard immediately.
• Write your plan to improve for all the ‘No’ answers in the space provided.
Unit 2.indd 77 23-08-2018 17:04:10
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 78
Statements Yes/No My plan for improvement
I wash my hands with soap every time I use the toilet.
I do not bite my nails. They are always clean and clipped.
I cover my mouth every time I cough or sneeze in public places.
I regularly take bath to avoid body
I do not have dandruff or dirt in my hair.
I never wear dirty clothes.
My feet are smooth and not dry.
My hair is clean, non-greasy/not oily and it smells fresh all the time.
Check Your Progress
A. Multiple choice questions
Read the questions carefully and circle the letter (a), (b), (c) or (d) that best answers the question.
1. Do you think people living in hill stations can skip taking a bath for many days?
(a) No, irrespective of the climate, one should take a bath regularly.
(b) Yes, not taking bath for many days is acceptable for people staying in cold climate.
(c) Yes, if they wipe themselves with a wet cloth, then it is fine.
(d) None of the above
2. Radha wants to grow her hair and she applies a lot of hair oil. She does not wash her hair for days and sometimes it smells bad too. What would be your suggestion to her?
(a) She can leave the oil in her hair, after all it helps her hair to grow.
(b) She can leave it on at night and wash her hair every day before leaving home.
(c) She should not apply the oil at all.
(d) She can apply the oil and pour a little water on her hair before leaving home to reduce the smell.
B. Short answer question
1. List three things you will do for personal grooming in each of CARE, WASH and AVOID to keep clean.
Unit 2.indd 78 23-08-2018 17:04:10
S elf -management SkillS 79
After completing this session, you will be able to
• list the benefits of maintaining personal hygiene.
• list the habits you need to avoid to maintain a good hygiene.
• demonstrate the techniques to wash your hands effectively.
What have you learnt?
S eSSIon 6: groomIng
Grooming and its Importance
Dressing is the action of putting on clothes. Grooming is the process of making yourself look neat, tidy and smart. The way you dress, and groom can either send the message that you are confident, smart and sincere or possess opposite qualities.
Dressing and grooming are important because they
• look smart
• feel confident about ourselves
• make a good impression of ourselves
Guidelines for dressing and grooming
Examples of good dressing and grooming
• Clean clothes
• Clean face, short hair for boys and neatly tied hair for girls
• Minimum or no flashy things in your dress to school
• Clothes should be clean, neat, and
• Shoes should be clean and polished
• Change socks everyday and always wear clean socks
• Keep accessories like belts, jewellery, etc.,
• In certain jobs display of bodily tatoos and piercing is not accepted
• Hair should be washed regularly to keep clean
• Simple hair styles and well combed hair gives a smart look
• Face looks clean if you shave regularly
• Moustache should be neatly trimmed
• Teeth should be kept clean, without any
• Brush the teeth twice a day to maintain dental
• Avoid eating Paan or chewing betle.
Unit 2.indd 79 23-08-2018 17:04:11
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 80
The teacher will facilitate these activities by showing you the e-learning module for this lesson via http://www.psscive.ac.in/
Employability_Skills.html. The module will include videos and e-content for the above topics as well as detailed instructions for some activities below.
Initial thinking activity
After watching the initial video ‘A dressing disaster’ in the e-learning lesson for this topic, write down what went wrong in the video.
Activity 1
Role-play: Using dressing and grooming standards
Materials required
Pen/pencil, notepad or sheets of paper
Procedure
• Form groups of three.
• Each group prepares a role-play on any one of the following situations. Within each group, two members act out the situation and the third member observes and makes notes on what went well, what could be better and the dressing and grooming displayed in the role-play.
Situations (a) You have to participate in an interschool debate competition. Discuss with your friend what all will you do to create a good first impression.
(b) You have noticed that your classmate does not wear appropriate clothes to school. You have to educate him about the dressing and grooming standards.
Activity 2
Self-reflection on dressing and grooming well
Materials required
Pen/pencil, notebook
Procedure
• Answer the statements with a ‘Yes’ or a ‘No’. If your answer is ‘Yes’, you are already following the desired norms of grooming. If your answer is ‘No’, then you have to start working on the various aspects of personal grooming.
Statements Yes/No My plan for improvement
Wear clothes that fit you
Make sure your clothes are neat and
Hair is clean and always combed
Unit 2.indd 80 23-08-2018 17:04:11
S elf -management SkillS 81
Teeth are always clean and brushed every day
Wear shoes that are clean and polished
• Write your plan to improve for the ‘No’ answers in space
After completing this session, you will be able to
• list the benefits of personal grooming.
provided.
Check Your Progress
A. Multiple choice questions
Read the questions carefully and circle the letter (a), (b), (c) or (d) that best answers the question.
1. Dressing and grooming are important because they help us to look_____________________.
(a) smart (b) untidy (c) shabby (d) All of the above
2. The following image is an example of _________________ (a) informal (b) formal (c) Both of the above (d) None of the above
3. The following image is an example of _________________
T-shirt.
(a) informal (b) formal (c) Both of the above (d) None of the above
What have you learnt?
gloSSary
Ability: a special skill or talent that a person has
Attitude: a way of thinking or feeling about something
Beautician: a person whose job is to give people beauty treatment
Compassion: feeling the other person’s pain
Unit 2.indd 81 23-08-2018 17:04:11
