E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 82
Compliment: a polite way of saying something good about someone
Express: to show
Goal Setting: a way of finding out what we want to achieve in life
Gratitude: being grateful towards something or someone
Grooming: the things that you do to make your appearance clean and neat
Guidelines: a general rule, principle or piece of advice
Imagine: forming a picture of or about something in your mind
Impression: an idea, a feeling or an opinion about something or
Presentable: clean, smart and decent enough to be seen in public
Qualities: a distinctive attribute or characteristic possessed by someone or something
Receptionist: a person who is employed to receive and help the guests in a hotel
Unit 2.indd 82 23-08-2018 17:04:11
IntroductIon
ICT stands for Information and Communication
Technology. It includes a diverse set of technological tools and resources used to communicate, create, disseminate, store, and manage information. ICT includes computers, the Internet, broadcasting technologies (radio and television) and telephony.
In digital technology, translation of information is into binary format (zero or one) where each bit is a representative of two distinct amplitudes, whereas in analog technology, information is translated into electric pulses of varying amplitude. UNESCO defines informatics as the science dealing with the design, realisation, evaluation, use, and maintenance of information processing systems, including hardware, software, organisational and human aspects, and the industrial, commercial, governmental and political implications of these.
People use technology every day at home and at workplace. ICT tools enable anytime, anywhere access to information and resources. The various ICT tools that are used include computers we use at work, smartphones
Unit Unit
Information and
Communication
Technology Skills
Unit 3.indd 83 23-08-2018 16:20:35
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 84 through which we talk, Internet for getting information, communicating with others through e-mail and social networks, watching movies and TV shows, etc. For example, to find a job you may have to search the Internet for job openings, create a resume on a computer, use e-mail to send the resume, send messages through your phone to communicate appear for telephonic interview and get your offer letter through e-mail.
ICT skills help us to communicate, run our business and stay connected with our family and friends. Hence, every person needs to acquire ICT skills and build them to stay updated with the latest software and applications (apps).
S eSSIon 1: IntroductIon to Ict
Information can be recorded or stored in many ways. It can be hand-written on paper, typed using a typewriter or a computer and so on. When information is stored and recorded on electronic devices, it takes on a ‘digital’ form. ICT devices are tablet, smartphones and laptops’ as shown in Figure 3.1. As a student you should be able to identify and understand the functions of
Figure 3.2: ICT Devices the main components of a typical information and/ or communication system as well as the functions
Figure 3.1: ICT technology
Unit 3.indd 84 23-08-2018 16:20:36
