InformatIon and CommunICatIon teChnology SkIllS 85 of various computer peripherals. It will help you to effectively utilise the knowledge and skills of ICT. The basic ICT skills that you need are
• knowing how to operate computers; and
• knowing how to browse the Internet for collecting, storing and disseminating information.
ICT at Workplace
ICT has become part of our workplace in all sectors of economy, right from carrying out money transactions through the online banking system to development of textbooks or research papers in educational institutions.
At workplace, we use different computer software and applications to complete tasks like making documents, calculations, tables, graphs, etc. We can also use applications to do every day work, like buying things, booking train or bus tickets, Internet banking and making online payments. Modern ICT employs a variety of media forms, which includes text, graphics, animation, audio and video, etc. It also involves creating, curating, managing images and documents; gathering and processing data and presenting them; working with audio and video tools to create media rich communications, etc. Therefore, employees are expected to possess a sound knowledge of all these to work independently on various software and computers.
ICT at Home
These days most of the people uses television for entertainment and phones for calling up other people.
New devices, such as smartphones with an Internet connection are now being used to stay connected with family and friends on a regular basis through social media networks, such as Facebook, Instagram and Twitter. We use computers and mobile phones for talking to each other, sending and receiving information, watching videos and news, listening to music and playing games. You can visit the following sites and know about the ICT activities which are being carried out in various sectors.
Unit 3.indd 85 23-08-2018 16:20:36
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 86
Sector ICT used for Website
Agriculture Various activities related to research, development and training in agriculture and allied fields http://dare.nic.in/ https://bit.
ly/2H3DJfU
Retail Training programmes in the retail sector http://rasci.in/
Beauty and
Wellness
Training programmes in beauty and wellness sector http://www.bwssc.in/ and Finance
Training programmes in banking, financial services and insurance sector http://www.bfsissc.com/
Apparel Training programmes in Apparel sector http://sscamh.com/indexHome.php
Logistics Training programmes in Logistics sector http://lsc-india.com/
Health Care Training programmes in Health Care http://www.healthcare-ssc.in
The above-mentioned sites are suggestive. You may visit various other sites related to the sectors for more information about the activities being organised in the sector and understand the benefits of ICT in searching, collecting and using information for different purposes.
These activities will be run under guidance and with feedback from vocational teacher.
Activity 1
Past, present and future use of ICT
Materials required
Diagrams or models of the basic computer components, actual samples or illustrations of peripheral devices, chart sheets sketch pens and pencils
Procedure
• Form groups of five students each
• Each group will divide the chart paper into three columns.
• Each group will choose one topic related to the past present and future use of ICT
Activity 2
Application of ICT
Materials required
Poster and newspapers cutting, pens, etc.
Unit 3.indd 86 23-08-2018 16:20:36
InformatIon and CommunICatIon teChnology SkIllS 87
Procedure
• Form groups of three students
• Discuss the role and importance of ICT in personal life and in workplace.
• List at least five points in each area.
• Prepare a poster depicting five ways each in which ICT is modifying:
(a) personal life (b) workplace
• Make a mention of an activity using ICT (e.g., train reservations), the technology (e.g., online ticket booking through railway website), how ICT has affected the activity (e.g., getting train tickets sitting at home) and how the activity was conducted before the technology (e.g., queuing at railway stations)
• You can use newspaper cuttings, or other material that you can get from outside.
Check Your Progress
A. State whether the following statements are True or False
1. The full form of ICT is Information Commuting
Technology.
2. Live sports and news can only be shown using ICT.
B. Short answer questions
1. Give any two uses of ICT at home.
2. What are the emerging skills in ICT?
3. What are the key skills one should possess to use ICT?
What have you learnt?
After completing this session, you will be able to
• identify the importance of information and communication technology.
• list the various tools that are being used for ICT.
• demonstrate the knowledge of application of ICT in our daily life
S eSSIon 2: Ict toolS: S martphoneS and tabletS — I
Smartphones and tablets are becoming more and more important as most people carry them around and
Unit 3.indd 87 23-08-2018 16:20:36
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 88 use them in daily activities like sending e-mails and messages, sharing pictures, etc. Without these, most people cannot work with others. The spreading of an idea, or of news occurring somewhere in the world is now possible through social sites on the internet. As long as one person is able to connect to the internet and express their view about a situation or simply about an idea, then the information that individual will want to share, will get out into the world. Smartphones are now being used to stay connected with social media and exchange information.
Smartphones
Mobile phones are ICT tools for talking to people but smartphones are more advanced. With a simple mobile phone you can only make phone calls and receive calls.
With a smartphone (Figure 3.3), you can make calls and do things that you normally do using a computer, such as browsing the web, sending e-mails, making video calls, playing games, listening to music, watching movies and much more.
Smartphones are also called mobile phones as you can use them anywhere — at home, in office or on the road (Figure 3.4). They do not need a telephone line.
They use wireless (mobile) networks to make calls and to connect to the Internet. Some of the popular operating systems for smartphones are Android OS, Apple iOS and Windows Mobile.
For some activities, such as reading a book for a longtime, the screen of a mobile may be too small. For such activities, we can use a tablet (Figure 3.4).
A tablet is a mini computer with input, output and processing functions that are all combined into one ‘touchscreen’, where you can do various tasks just by touching its screen. It is bigger than a smartphone and you can perform all the functions that one can perform on a computer or a smartphone.Figure 3.4: A tablet
Figure 3.3: A smartphone
Unit 3.indd 88 23-08-2018 16:20:37
InformatIon and CommunICatIon teChnology SkIllS 89
TV and Radio
TV and radio are being used as an ICT tool since a long time. Radio is used to broadcast audio while TV is used to broadcast audio-visual information to many people.
Radio and TV are used for both entertainment and to learn new things. You can hear news, songs, stories, speeches, cricket commentary, etc., on radio, while TV is used for watching movies, news, weather forecast, songs, cartoons and educational lectures.
Applications or apps
How does a smartphone perform so many functions? It does so with the help of software applications (Apps). On the screen of a Smartphone or Tablet, you see a lot of small pictures (or ‘icons’). If you touch these, they start programs or functions required for watching movies, playing games, using camera, etc.
Apps are software programs (a set of instructions, or a set of modules or procedures, that allow for a certain type of computer operation) that perform different functions. Some of the apps are already present on the phone or tablet. These are called “default” apps. Besides, there are hundreds of other apps that can be purchased and downloaded or downloaded free of cost from online stores. There are several online stores, including Google
Play Store for Android and Apple App Store for Apple (Figure 3.5).
Commonly found applications
Some of the default apps installed on all smartphones/ mobiles are given in Table 3.1.
Figure 3.5: App. Stores
Table 3.1: Some of the default Apps installed on smartphones and simple mobile phones
Phone: This app is used to make calls. It also stores the names and phone numbers of people you know.
Camera: Connects to the camera in the phone and takes photos and
Calendar: Shows a calendar and you can also enter appointments, reminders, etc.
Mail: An e-mail app to send and receive e-mails using your E-mail account in Gmail, Yahoo, Outlook,
Unit 3.indd 89 23-08-2018 16:20:37
