E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 90
Photos: This helps you store all your photos and video and arrange them into albums.
Clock: This shows the time and also sets alarm, timers, etc.
Maps: This app helps you find directions to where you want to go. It uses GPS (Global
Positioning System)
Messages: This is for sending and receiving SMS messages.
Web Browser: This allows you to open a browser to search and visit different websites.
Music: This allows you to play and listen to songs and music.
Google Play store: This is the
Google store from where you can get apps like Facebook,
WhatsApp, etc. Some apps are free while some are paid
Apple Store: As Android smartphones have a Google
Playstore, similarly, Apple devices have an Apple store where you can download and use various apps.
Table 3.2: Smartphone vs. Tablet
Smartphone Tablet
Main usage As a phone but with some additional features, such as camera. The majority of smartphones run on
Apple iOS or Google Android but others use Windows Phone or
BlackBerry OS.
As a wireless portable personal computer with a touchscreen interface which makes it more useful than the notebook computer.
Some tablets use Android OS, others useApple iOS or Windows OS.
Screen size Screen size is smaller Has a bigger screen
Photos and
Watching a movie or making changes to a picture is difficult
Watching videos and making changes to a photo is better and easier due to bigger screen size
Battery life You need to charge phones more often Usually have a longer battery life
Storage Comes with different storage capacities, but phones with high storage are costly
Usually have higher storage capacity, i.e., they can store more pics, videos and Apps
Difference between a smartphone and a tablet are given in Table 3.2.
Unit 3.indd 90 23-08-2018 16:20:37
InformatIon and CommunICatIon teChnology SkIllS 91
The teacher will facilitate these activities by showing you the e-learning module for this lesson via http://www.psscive.ac.in/
Employability_Skills.html. The module will include videos and e-content for the above topics as well as detailed instructions for some activities below.
Activity
Getting started with mobile devices
Materials required
Pen/pencil, notebook, smartphone, tablet
Procedure
• Form groups depending on the number of smartphones and
Tablet available. For example, if you have 2 smartphones and 3 tablet, form 5 groups.
• The group studies the basic features of smartphone or a tablet. Note down the names of the Apps or icons you see in the smartphone/tablet. Compare the differences between tablet and smartphones.
Check Your Progress
A. Short answer questions
1. Identify the following symbols and write the name in the blank space.
Write any two differences between a smartphone and a
Unit 3.indd 91 23-08-2018 16:20:37
E mployability SkillS – ClaSS iX 92
What have you learnt?
After completing this session, you will be able to
• demonstrate the knowledge of the uses of ICT tools, such as smartphones and tablet.
• differentiate between smartphones and tablets.
S eSSIon 3: Ict toolS: S martphoneS and tabletS — II
To operate your smartphone, you need to know about basic controls and functions and their uses.
Mobile Device Layout
Some of the basic controls you see on mobile device are as follows: (Figure 3.6):
Figure 3.6: Basic Controls of a Mobile
• Power button: This is used to start and shut down a mobile device.
• Screen: A screen on which we perform functions by touching with our fingers.
• Back button: You use the Back Button to go back to the previous screen in an application.
• Microphone: This is present at the bottom of the mobile and we speak into the microphone when we talk to someone.
• Menu button: This is used to show the options available in a particular app. This may not be present in all mobile devices.
• Home button: This brings you back to the
Home Screen from wherever you are in your mobile, whether you are on another page or using an App.
• Earpiece: This helps you to listen to voice calls.
• Volume button: This helps you to increase or reduce the sound of your mobile.
Basic features of a mobile device
Some of the basic features present in all mobile devices are as given in Table 3.3.
Unit 3.indd 92 23-08-2018 16:20:37
