India and the World: Land and the People
1 – The Story of Indian Farming
The Story of
Indian Farming
A farmer who looks after the welfare of his cattle, visits his farms daily, has the knowledge of the seasons, is careful about seeds, and is industrious, is rewarded with harvests of all kinds and never perishes.
Kṛiṣhi Parāśhara
1. What are the main characteristics of Indian agriculture?
2. How are farming, climate, soil, and water interrelated?
3. How can traditional practices and contemporary ones complement each other?
Questions
Fig. 1.1. (1) Ploughing a field with a ploughshare pulled by oxen. (2) A farmer uses a tractor to plough the land.
(3) Women transplanting rice seedlings. (4) Transplanting seedlings using a transplanter. (5) Separating wheat from the stalk using a threshing machine. (6) Transporting vegetables on the Dal Lake, Kashmir.
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
India’s Agricultural Landscape
Farming or agriculture is one of the oldest occupations of humankind. It encompasses the preparation of soil, cultivation of plants, rearing of livestock, and, in many cases, the growing of trees as part of a comprehensive farming system. In some areas, farmers also practice pisciculture (fish rearing) or rear cocoons to extract silk thread. Very broadly, the term
‘agriculture’ encompasses farming, animal husbandry (raising livestock), forestry, and horticulture.
DON’T MISS OUT
The word agriculture comes from Latin. Agri means field and culture means to cultivate. The Government of India classifies economic activities related to agriculture as ‘agriculture and allied activities’. Broadly, this includes agriculture, livestock- related activities, beekeeping (apiculture), fisheries, rearing of silkworms and preparing silk yarn, and fibre production, such as cotton and hemp.
A little over 18 per cent of the country’s total value of goods and services produced in a year (gross domestic product) comes from agriculture and allied activities (2022-2023). Approximately 46 per cent of India’s working population is engaged in agriculture and allied activities for their livelihood (2022-2023). A large proportion of families in India are closely connected to the land in one way or another, and in many cases, have been cultivating it for generations. Farming activities are, of course, essential for nurturing and sustaining the human population.
THINK ABOUT IT
When you read or hear the word ‘farmer’, what do you visualise? Many people imagine a man. However, in rural areas of India, more than 75 per cent of people working in the agriculture sector are women (2025). They perform most of the farming operations, from sowing to harvesting and threshing.
Threshing:
Removing the edible grain from the straw or husk, manually or using a
India and the World: Land and the People
1 – The Story of Indian Farming
India’s agricultural landscape is a vibrant blend of traditional and modern farming practices, with diverse crops and deep- rooted cultural traditions. From the golden wheat fields of
Punjab, the saffron valley of Kashmir, the lush tea gardens of the
Northeast or the Nilgiris to the emerald paddy fields of Kerala, agriculture has long been a fundamental part of the nation’s identity.
LET’S EXPLORE
Create a list of the foods you typically eat. Identify the grains, pulses, oils, vegetables, and fruits in them. Now locate where you live on a physical map of India. (You may refer to the political map of India at the end of the book if you wish.) Which of the food items do you think grow in and around where you live? What do you think are the reasons that they are cultivated in your region? Which of them comes from other places? Why do you think they are not grown in your area?
You may have reasoned that growing crops is dependent on several factors — the soil, the climate, the availability of water, the terrain, and so on. The story of farming is, therefore, linked to these factors. We will look at some of these factors in this chapter. But before that, we need to go back a little in time…
Echoes from the Past
The story of Indian farming goes back to prehistory.
Archaeological investigations have shown the presence of rice grains in the Ganga Plain as early as the 7th or 8th millennium
BCE. Some experts have, however, pointed out that this need not mean that rice cultivation was already systematic; that may have taken a few more millennia to be mastered. At Mehrgarh (in Baluchistan, a site antecedent of the Sindhu-Sarasvatī civilisation), the cultivation of barley and millets is also dated to the 7th millennium BCE. Later, barley and wheat were the staple crops of the Harappans; several Harappan sites also point to the presence of rice in the 3rd millennium BCE, at least in some regions, apart from millets and several vegetables.
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
Fig. 1.2. (Top) Intercropping at the Harappan site of Kalibangan (Rajasthan) around 2800 BCE, as evidenced by perpendicular furrows.
(Bottom) The same practice continuing in the 1960s, around 4800 years later!
Over time, farmers learned to cultivate oilseeds (such as sesame, safflower, linseed, mustard, and castor), legumes (green gram, black gram, and fenugreek), fibre crops (cotton, hemp, jute), more vegetables, and fruits (grapes, dates, jujube, jackfruit, mango, mulberry, and black plum).
DON’T MISS OUT
The Vedas also mention yava (barley), godhūma (wheat) and vrīhi (rice) as well as other crops such as sesame, black gram, and various types of pulses and legumes.
Intercropping:
the practice of growing two or more different crops simultaneously
India and the World: Land and the People
1 – The Story of Indian Farming
This period also saw the domestication of animals. Cattle, asses, sheep, goats, dogs, pigs, fowl, and other animals were domesticated from the pre-urban phase of the Sindhu-Sarasvatī civilisation (c. 3500 BCE).
In the historical period, ancient Indian texts provide a wealth of information on agriculture. Kauṭilya’s Arthaś hā stra, the Sangam literature of the early Tamils, Amarakoṣha, Kṛiṣhiparāś hara,
Varāhamihira’s Bṛihatsamhitā , and Surapāla’s Vṛikṣhā yurveda, among others, contain writings on agriculture, horticulture, and plant biodiversity. Some texts also refer to the rearing and care of animals.
Surapāla’s Vṛikṣhā yurveda provides recommendations on seed preparation, soil cultivation methods, planting techniques, and more. “Seeds sprinkled with milk, rubbed with cow dung, dried and profusely smeared with maksika (honey) and bidanga (false black pepper) definitely sprout.” On watering of trees — “Newly planted trees in arid land should be watered every morning and evening for a period of fifteen days until the soil is fully soaked.”
Further recommendations include irrigation methods for other types of soils. The Bṛihatsamhitā describes a method of grafting still in use today.
From the types of plants, animals, soils, and climates to the methods of irrigation, we find a wealth of information about the knowledge and practices of our ancestors regarding agriculture in these texts.
Grafting:
A technique that joins one plant with another to grow as a single plant enabling the combining of desirable traits like resistance to pests or sweetness of the fruit.
Fig. 1.3. An example of intercropping:
growing sugarcane along with pumpkin
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
Climate, Seasons, and Crops:
What Grows Where and When?
India’s varied geography and climate influence the variety of crops grown in different regions and at various times of the year. This section examines India’s climatic diversity, the primary cropping seasons, and the pivotal role of monsoons in the country’s agriculture.
In the words of Xuanzang, a Chinese pilgrim travelling in India in the 7th century (you will meet him later in this book), “The climate and the quality of the soil being different according to situation, the produce of the land is various in its character. The flowers and plants, the fruits and trees are different kinds, and have distinct names.”
This was a sharp observation of India’s climatic diversity. In
Part 1 of this textbook, we introduced seven different types of climates in India.
LET’S REMEMBER
The types of climates in India are:
Æ Alpine – the Himalayas
Æ Temperate – the lower Himalayas
Æ Subtropical – the northern plains
Æ Arid – the Thar Desert
Æ Tropical wet – western coastal strip
Æ Semi-arid – central Deccan Plateau
Æ Tropical – eastern India and the southern peninsula
Each of these areas receives different quantities of sunshine and rainfall, experiences variations in the temperatures across the seasons, and is affected differently by the monsoons.
India is divided into 15 agroclimatic zones. In simple terms, climate factors, different types of soil and terrain, and types of vegetation are combined to create these categories. This categorisation helps the government and other agencies identify
India and the World: Land and the People
1 – The Story of Indian Farming and plan appropriate actions to improve agricultural production
— what, when, and how to grow different crops. A few examples of agroclimatic zones are the Upper Gangetic Plain Region,
Southern Plateau and Hills Region, and Western Dry Region.
The monsoon and agriculture
The Indian monsoon system is a key factor in the country’s agricultural diversity. It brings rainfall, which is vital for many crops. India experiences the southwest monsoon and the northeast monsoon. (Refer to the chapter ‘Climates of India’ in Part 1 of this textbook.) The southwest monsoon brings rain from June to September. It is crucial for the seasonal growth of kharif crops in northern and central India. The northeast monsoon prevails from October to December. This brings rainfall to the east and south of India. Coastal regions, including the
Malabar (Kerala) and Coromandel (Tamil Nadu) plains, receive rainfall from both the southwest and northeast monsoons.
The rain from these two monsoon periods enables farmers in the south to grow crops during the period in between; this is a dry season for farmers in north India who depend on other sources of water like groundwater, water from rivers, canals and ponds, and moisture retained in the soil, to ensure irrigation for their crops. States like Tamil
Nadu, West Bengal and Andhra
Pradesh grow rice throughout the year on account of availability of water from the monsoon as well as irrigation.
LET’S EXPLORE
Imagine that your state received less than normal monsoon rains for two consecutive years. Which items are likely to disappear from your meals, or are likely to become difficult to access?
Fig. 1.4. An irrigated crop of peanuts in south India
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
The rhythm of seasons and crops:
kharif, rabi, and zaid
Indian agriculture is mainly divided into three cropping seasons:
kharif, rabi, and zaid.
Farmers have been following this rhythm for centuries. A wide variety of agricultural products becomes available throughout the year. This rhythm is one of the factors that ensures food supply for the people. The terms kharif, rabi, and zaid are of
Arabic origin and have been in use since the Mughal times.
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
RABI sowing growing
ZAID harvesting
KHARIF growing watermelon cucumber muskmelon groundnut sugarcane rabi season (winter crops)
kharif season (monsoon crops)
zaid season (summer crops)
summer season
Fig. 1.5. Kharif, rabi, and zaid crops and seasons in most parts of India sowing harvesting hot, heavy rainfall cool, less water harvesting
India and the World: Land and the People
1 – The Story of Indian Farming
DON’T MISS OUT
Before the Arabic terms for the three types of crops became more widely used, they were called kedā ra (wet crops), haimana (winter crops), and graiṣhmika (summer crops).
Each of these crop seasons presents its own unique challenges as well. For example, the kharif crops are dependent on the timely arrival of the monsoons. Excessive rainfall also leads to the destruction of crops, causing significant distress to farmers and their families in particular.
LET’S EXPLORE
Prepare a list of the crops that are cultivated in your state or union territory in a year and classify them into kharif, rabi, and zaid.
Fig. 1.6. Rabi crops of mustard (in the foreground) and wheat (in the background)
Fig. 1.7. Pearl millet, a kharif crop
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
DON’T MISS OUT
The Arthaśhāstra contains sections on agriculture, including the preparation of land and seeds, as well as payment to farmers and other relevant topics. “A good rainy season is one when one-third of the annual rainfall occurs at the beginning (Śhrāvaṇa — July-August) and at the end of the season (Kārtika — October-November), and two-thirds in the middle (Prauṣhṭhapada — August-September and Āś hvayuja
— September-October).” Why do you think this statement was made? (Hint: Did it have anything to do with the crop cycle?)
Soil, the Foundation of Cultivation
Soil is the thin, upper layer of the Earth’s crust that supports plant life. It is formed over millions of years through the breakdown of rocks and the decay of organic matter. It’s the most essential resource for farmers, as it provides the necessary nutrients, water, and support for crops to grow. This section examines the various soils found in the Indian subcontinent and their associations with specific crops.
How is soil formed?
Fig. 1.8. A simplified diagram of soil formation, a process that ranges from a century to several millennia
Organic matter Organic matter
Parent material Parent material Parent material Disintegrating rock
Bedrock Bedrock Bedrock Bedrock
Top Soil Top Soil
Bedrock begins to disintegrate
Organic materials facilitate disintegration
Developed soil supports thick vegetation
Layers formed
Mineral fragments and organic matter
Humus is the dark organic matter in soil that is formed by the decomposition of plant and animal matter.
It is rich in nutrients and retains moisture in the soil.
Humus is the
Latin word for
‘earth’ or ‘soil’.
India and the World: Land a n d t h e
1 – The Story o f I n d i a n
F a r m i n g
Soils of India
India has a diverse range of soil types, each with its distinct properties. Ancient texts, such as the Amarakoṣha, describe twelve types of agricultural land based on soil fertility. Today, we classify the soils of India into six major types: alluvial soil, black soil, red soil, laterite soil, desert soil, and mountain / alpine soil.
LET’S EXPLORE
Æ Try to name at least two states in each of the zones mentioned above.
Æ Which type of soil is predominantly found in your state or union territory?
Æ Soils tell us stories about places — what might have happened over thousands of years during which the soils were being formed. Take a few samples of soil from your neighbourhood. Look carefully at them. (Examine the soil using a magnifying glass or microscope if you have access to either.) What do the samples consist of? What might be the origins of the soil? Are there signs of human activity that you notice? What might happen to the soil over time on account of this?
Soil-crop linkages
In addition to the agroclimatic conditions that we briefly saw above, crops are also strongly influenced by the type of soil where they grow.
LET’S EXPLORE
Æ Take up a small group project. Identify the types of vegetables, fruits, and trees that grow in the different soil types.
Æ Create a family food flowchart that connects your favourite dishes to the different crops they are prepared from and the corresponding soil types in which they are cultivated.
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
Silt: A fine- grained, dust-like sediment composed of rock and particles that are larger than clay but smaller than sand. As a result, they are easily transported by rivers from the mountains to the plains.
Weathering:
Refers to the process by which rocks and minerals are broken down into soil particles physical, chemical, or biological
Fig. 1.9. A simplified map of the major soil types of India and their formation. Most regions will have local variations.
Sandy soil: made up mostly of small grains of sand; when a little bit of water, air and organic matter mix, it becomes sandy soil
Alpine soil: formed by the freezing and melting of ice which leads to weathering of rock; the soil is thin, rough and rocky
Black soil or cotton soil:
formed by the weathering of volcanic rocks;
holds a lot of moisture and is very fertile
Red soil: formed by weathering of lava (that has cooled slowly) or of old rocks;
they are red because they have a chemical called iron; when iron reacts with air and water it becomes reddish in colour; not very fertile
Laterite soil or brick earth: formed by the weathering of rock by rain; becomes hard in hot weather.
Most minerals get washed away leaving largely iron and aluminium, react with air and water and give reddish colour; not
Alluvial soil:
Silt deposits (mud, sand and other fine particles)
brought by rivers from the mountains and plateaus;
nutrients
0 250 500 750 km
India and the World: Land and the People
1 – The Story of Indian Farming
Bedrock:
Bedrock refers to the original rock from which new rocks and soils are derived weathering, erosion, and other processes.
maize*, bajra, groundnut, vegetables and fruits rice, tea, nutmeg, cardamom, vegetables and fruits wheat, rice*, jowar (sorghum), urad dal (black gram), sunflower, linseed (flax), groundnuts, cotton, sugarcane, fruits and vegetables rice, wheat*, ragi (finger millet, arhar dal (red gram), groundnuts and mustard*, cotton*, tobacco, vegetables and rice, wheat*, ragi, groundnut, sunflower, tea, coffee, rubber, cinchona, coconut, areca nut, and cashew nut, yam, tapioca rice, wheat, maize, barley, bajra* (pearl millet), chana dal (chickpea), mustard and groundnuts (peanut), sugarcane, jute, cotton*, f
