India and the World: Land and the People
2 – India and H e r Neighbours
India and Her Neighbours
2Our destinies are inextricably tied together. What affects one nation affects the rest of us.
— Nelson Mandela (1995)
Questions
1. What defines a ‘neighbour’?
Is it just shared land borders?
2. How do geography and history influence the nature of
India’s relationships with her neighbours?
3. In what ways are India and her neighbours interconnected today?
Fig. 2.1. India and some of her neighbours
INDIAN INDIAN
OCEAN OCEAN
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
Framing the Neighbourhood
When we think of a neighbour, we often imagine a country that shares a land boundary with us. That is the traditional view of neighbourhood. In that sense, Pakistan and Afghanistan in the northwest, China’s region of Tibet, Nepal, and Bhutan in the north, and Bangladesh and Myanmar in the east are indeed our neighbours. India’s total land boundary stretches over 15,100 km and passes through diverse landscapes, including deserts, plains, forests, mountains, marshes, and river valleys.
India, however, has always been a maritime nation, surrounded by the sea on three sides. This makes Sri Lanka and the Maldives our immediate neighbours across the waters. But if we look at
India from a high-altitude satellite, we can also see that nations like Iran, Oman, Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, and Indonesia are part of our maritime neighbourhood. In this chapter, we use this understanding of a wider neighbourhood to situate India’s central and strategic place in South Asia (Fig. 2.1).
DON’T MISS OUT
Who is a maritime neighbour?
A maritime neighbour is a country connected to another by a shared sea or ocean, even without a direct land border.
(Revisit the chapter ‘Oceans and Continents’ in your Grade 6 textbook.) The ocean acts as a vital link, facilitating centuries of trade, cultural exchange, and historical ties. In this chapter, we will visit only the maritime neighbours nearest to India.
LET’S EXPLORE
Identify the three large water bodies that surround India in the map on the facing page (Fig.2.2).
India and the World: Land and the People
2 – India and H e r Neighbours
Fig. 2.2. A simplified map of the major land and sea routes that have connected
India with many regions and countries of Eurasia and Africa over the centuries.
(The routes shown here are approximate and fluctuated in time.)
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
DON’T MISS OUT
The Indian Ocean is the third-largest ocean in the world and is a busy route where half of the world’s container ships, one third of the bulk cargo, and two-thirds of the world’s oil are transported. This ocean connects many countries, which are home to around 2.7 billion people.
With a long coastline of approximately 11,100 km, India holds a unique maritime position. Her peninsular shape extends deep into the Indian Ocean — a location that provides India with access to important sea routes, making her a vital link between
Southeast Asia, West Asia, and Africa. This has allowed India to play a key role in trade and regional cooperation. India’s ports serve as gateways for imports and exports, and her central position helps in providing timely humanitarian aid and disaster relief in the region.
Such involvement is called regionalism and helps create peace, stability, and shared progress. It teaches us that being good neighbours is not just about borders, but also about working together for the benefit of everyone in the region. See the map in
Fig. 2.2 to get a sense of the dense networks of land and sea routes connecting India with many regions in this part of the world.
India and Her Land-based Neighbours
India and her largest neighbour
Since 1950, India and China, two of Asia’s largest and most influential nations, have shared a long and strategic relation- ship shaped by history, geography, culture, trade, and politics.
Separated by the Himalayas, their border stretches (from east to west) across the states of Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim,
Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, and the Union Territory of
Culturally, Buddhism is a powerful link between the two countries.
Originating in India, it reached China around the 1st century CE via trade and pilgrimage routes. A few centuries later, Chinese monks like Faxian and Xuanzang travelled to Indian centres of
India and the World: Land and the People
2 – India and H e r Neighbours learning, while Indian monks such as Bodhidharma, Dharmakṣhema and Kumārajīva carried Buddhist teachings to China, creating deep spiritual and intellectual ties.
DON’T MISS OUT
In the 13th century, Hindu merchants built temples in the Chinese port city of Quanzhou, an important trading centre. At the Kaiyuan temple, pillars depict carvings of
Viṣhṇu, Śhiva, and stories from the
Rāmāyaṇa and the Purāṇas.
Fig. 2.3. India and China. (Note that China is approximately three times larger than India in area.)
Fig. 2.4. ‘Gajendra mokṣham’ or the story of Viṣhṇu rescuing the elephant from a crocodile, carved on a pillar at the Kaiyuan temple
70°E 80°E 90°E 100°E 110°E 120°E 130°E
C H I N A
I N D I A
New Delhi
Andaman &
Nicobar Islands
Lakshadweep
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
India’s trade relationship with China continues till date. In 2024-
2025, India’s chief exports to China were iron ore, chemicals, and cotton yarn; the imports include electronic items (including mobile phones, computer hardware, etc.), and a variety of industrial equipment. Several Indian companies have set up operations in
China and vice versa. However, the balance of trade is currently much in China’s favour, since her exports to India are worth about eight times more than India’s exports to China.
Recent years have also seen phases of heightened tensions, mostly related to their shared borders, and a few serious conflicts, some of which you will encounter in higher classes. On the other hand, efforts are being made to resolve disputes through trade, dialogue and border resolution mechanisms.
India and Pakistan
Fig. 2.5. India, Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Iran
50°E 60°E 70°E 80°E 90°E
I N D I A
PAKISTAN
AFGHANISTAN
New Delhi
Islamabad
Andaman &
Nicobar Islands
Lakshadweep
India and the World: Land and the People
2 – India and H e r Neighbours
Before the 1947 Partition — a legacy of the colonial era that continues to shape the present — Pakistan was a part of India.
Let us note for now that Pakistan was founded on a religious basis, unlike India; this will be explored further in Grade 8.
Suffice to say that these nations share one of the most complex relationships in South Asia. Since the Partition, several military conflicts and wars, including wars in 1948, 1965 and 1971, and full-scale conflicts like the Kargil War in 1999, have defined an ongoing tension. In particular, frequent terrorist attacks launched against India with the support of the Pakistan army have prevented normal relations between the two countries.
The border between the two nations stretches across the Indian states of Gujarat, Rajasthan, Punjab, and the union territories of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (Fig. 2.5). It is not just a geographical line, but also a symbol of shared heritage as well as a tragically divided history.
This tumultuous journey has also been marked by attempts at peace, such as periods of trade and the opening of pilgrimage routes for Hindu or Sikh pilgrims — religious and cultural landmarks of a shared past that lives on. The Katas Raj temple complex in Pakistan’s Punjab is one such example, linked to the
Mahābhārata and containing a sacred pond. Other examples include several ancient Hindu, Buddhist, and Sikh shrines, such as the Hinglaj Mata Mandir in Balochistan. Besides, languages, cuisines, music, and festivals continue to bridge the border.
DON’T MISS OUT
The Kartarpur Corridor is a visa-free border crossing between
India and Pakistan, created to allow Indian pilgrims to visit the Gurdwara Darbar Sahib in Kartarpur, Pakistan (Fig. 2.6).
Pilgrims using the corridor do not need a visa, only a permit, which makes it easier for thousands of people to visit the gurdwara. This gurdwara holds great religious significance as it is the final resting place of Guru Nānak Dev, the founder of
Sikhism, who spent the last 18 years of his life there.
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
For decades, Indian devotees could only view this holy site from a distance, using binoculars set up near the border at
Dera Baba Nanak in Punjab. The idea for a corridor was first proposed in the 1990s but only became a reality in 2019, when the corridor was officially opened to mark Guru Nānak’s 550th birth anniversary.
Can the Kartarpur Corridor be a model for the possible progress of peace and dialogue?
A newborn neighbour
India and Bangladesh have an enduring relationship shaped by a common history, culture and language. ‘History’ because, as we will see in higher grades, Bangladesh (which was ‘East Pakistan’ earlier) was born in 1971 as the outcome of a war between
India and Pakistan; and ‘language’ because Bangla is a language common to Bangladesh and India’s state of West Bengal.
The land border between the two countries (Fig. 2.7) is even longer than India’s border with China; it runs along the Indian states of West Bengal, Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura, and Mizoram.
India and Bangladesh also share several transboundary river systems originating from the Ganga and the Brahmaputra. The rivers play a major role in agriculture, fisheries, transportation, and the livelihoods of millions of people in both countries.
Fig. 2.6. A view of the Kartarpur Sahib Gurdwara
India and the World: Land and the People
2 – India and H e r Neighbours
India and Bangladesh have built on their historical ties through strong diplomatic, economic, strategic and cultural cooperation, making their relationship one of the most important in
South Asia.
The two countries also share a coastline, and therefore a maritime environment. The
Sundarban National Park (Fig.
2.8) is a UNESCO World Heritage
Site, with its protection and management coordinated by the two neighbours. A home to the Bengal tiger and many other species, it is important in terms of biodiversity, as well as climate
Fig. 2.8. A view of the largest mangrove forest of the world, in the Sundarban National Park.
About two-thirds of the forest lies in Bangladesh and the rest in India.
Fig. 2.7. India, Bangladesh, Nepal, and Bhutan
50°E 60°E 70°E 80°E 90°E
New Delhi
Kathmandu Thimpu
BANGLADESH
& Nicobar
Lakshadweep
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2 resilience since it serves as a barrier to cyclones. However, because of global warming and climate change, experts predict that Bangladesh will have to face the impact of rising sea levels and increasingly intense cyclones in coming years. Many people are likely to lose their homes or see their livelihoods affected.
In the lap of the Himalayas
Nestled in the lap of the Himalayas, Nepal shares a long and open border with India, stretching across the Indian states of
Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, and Sikkim (Fig. 2.7). This geographical proximity has allowed for centuries of interaction and cooperation between the two nations and the relationship is marked by shared heritage, spiritual linkages, cross-border movement, and political partnerships.
Culturally, the ties between India and Nepal are profound.
Pilgrims from both countries regularly visit sacred sites across the border. The Paśhupatinātha temple in Kathmandu (Fig. 2.9),
Fig. 2.9. The Paśhupatinātha Temple, Kathmandu, where Ś hiva is worshipped as the protector of animals
India and the World: Land and the People
2 – India and H e r Neighbours a major Hindu pilgrimage destination, draws thousands of
Indian visitors every year. Festivals such as Daśhain (Daśhaharā),
Tihar (Dīpāvalī), and Holi are observed with equal enthusiasm in both countries. These shared spiritual traditions strengthen the people-to-people bonds and reflect a rich tapestry of mutual cultural appreciation.
On the political front, India and Nepal have maintained close diplomatic relations, largely shaped by the 1950 Treaty of Peace and Friendship. This treaty provides for open borders, free movement of people and goods, and cooperation in areas such as defence and foreign policy. Cross-border migration and trade form another vital component of the India-Nepal relationship.
The open border policy allows citizens to cross freely without passports or visas, enabling people from both sides to access education, healthcare, employment, and maintain family connections. Daily life in many border towns reflects this close interdependence, with vibrant markets and thriving trade.
India is Nepal’s largest trading partner, supplying essential goods such as petroleum, medicines, food items, and manufactured products. In return, Nepal exports agricultural produce, handicrafts, and garments. These exchanges not only contribute to economic development but also reinforce the social and economic integration of the border communities. The India-
Nepal relationship stands as a unique example of neighbourhood cooperation shaped by a shared history, faith, geography, and a commitment to regional harmony.
DON’T MISS OUT
What is an ‘open border’? It is when people from two countries can travel across the border without a visa or passport. This enables families living on both sides to stay connected, and people to move easily for work, education, trade, or religious visits. However, India and Nepal work together to ensure the open border remains safe and is not misused; it is a symbol of trust and friendship between the two countries.
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
The ‘Land of the Thunder Dragon’
Bhutan, called ‘Drukyul’ or ‘Land of the Thunder Dragon’ by its inhabitants, is a small, landlocked Himalayan kingdom nestled between India and China. Bhutan’s border with India touches the states of Sikkim, West Bengal, Assam, and Arunachal Pradesh (see Fig. 2.7). Over centuries, Bhutan has developed strong economic and cultural links with India.
DON’T MISS OUT
Several important rivers originate in
Bhutan and flow into India; they are not only vital for agriculture but also serve as the foundation for hydroelectric power generation, which is one of the most significant areas of bilateral cooperation. Some major power plants contribute to
Bhutan’s economic growth and also supply renewable energy to India.
Fig. 2.10. The emblem of Bhutan. Notice the dragons that symbolise the
‘Land of the Thunder Dragon’. What other elements look familiar?
Fig. 2.11. The Tala Hydroelectric Project, built with support from India, being dedicated to the peoples of Bhutan and India by the two countries’ respective prime ministers in 2008.
Cultural and religious ties further strengthen the bond between the two nations.
Rooted in the shared heritage of Buddhism, Bhutan and
India maintain deep spiritual connections. Bhutanese pilgrims frequently visit sacred Buddhist sites in India, such as Bodh
Gaya, Rajgir, Nalanda, Udayagiri, and Sikkim. The influence of
Indian Buddhist masters such as Guru Padmasambhava (Guru
India and the World: Land and the People
2 – India and H e r Neighbours
Rinpoche), who introduced the Vajrayāna school of Buddhism to Bhutan in the 8th century CE, remains central to Bhutan’s religious identity. Indeed the dragon found on Bhutan’s emblem (Fig. 2.10) and flag is said to symbolise the ‘the thunderous voice of the Buddha’s teachings’.
The relationship between India and Bhutan is marked by mutual respect, strategic cooperation, and cultural affinity.
Their partnership exemplifies how shared geography, spiritual heritage, and economic collaboration can foster long-lasting and peaceful regional ties.
DON’T MISS OUT
Three main schools of Buddhism grew in ancient India and migrated to many of her neighbours:
Æ Theravāda, or the ‘School of the Elders’, took shape around the 3rd century BCE. It is considered closest to the Buddha’s original teachings and today has followers mainly in Sri
Lanka and in Southeast Asia, especially Thailand and
Myanmar.
Æ Mahāyāna or the ‘Great Vehicle’ came into being around the
1st century BCE, incorporating new ideas and practices, such as a belief that the Buddha had a divine nature and could guide people in many forms. This school travelled to several countries, including China, Japan and Korea, where several sub-schools (including Zen Buddhism) emerged on the way.
Æ Vajrayāna, or the ‘Diamond Vehicle’, also generally known as ‘Tantric Buddhism’, arose around the 6th century CE as an extension of Mahāyāna. It emphasised special techniques and secret teachings such as the use of mantras, mandalas (sacred diagrams), and visualisations of the Buddha and the bodhisattvas. Tibetan Buddhism derived from this school around the 7th century CE.
Even today, these three schools of Buddhism are still followed in some parts of India, especially in the Himalayan states.
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
Fig. 2.12. ‘Tiger’s nest’, a Buddhist monastery perched high on the mountainside overhanging the Paro valley, Bhutan
DON’T MISS OUT
Bhutan developed the concept of Gross National Happiness
Index as a more holistic measure of their nation’s progress compared with prevailing concepts like Gross Domestic
Product. This includes ideas of sustainability, good governance and the promotion of culture, among others. The country assesses its progress periodically based on this index.
India’s gateway to Southeast Asia
India and Myanmar (earlier known as ‘Burma’) share a long- standing relationship grounded in historical, ethnic, and cultural connections, despite periods of political turmoil. As the birthplace of Buddhism, India holds special spiritual significance for the people of Myanmar, many of whom visit India during pilgrimages. The two countries are connected by a land border a
