Empires and Kingdoms:
6th to 10th Centuries
India never spoke her last word. In all things, she continues, survives and renews herself.
— Louis Renou and Jean Filliozat (French Indologists)
1. What major changes characterised this period?
2. How did the political, cultural, and religious developments shape India during this period?
3. What was the impact of foreign invasions and interactions on Indian society and polity during this period?
Questions
Fig. 3.1. The Shore Temple at
Māmallapuram, built during the reign of Narasimhavarman II of the Pallava dynasty.
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
This chapter and the next together survey the scene in India from the end of the Gupta era about 600 CE to about 1200 CE.
These six centuries together have received several names —
‘post-classical’, ‘late classical’ and ‘early medieval’ among others.
We need not use any of those terms here, as long as we keep the broad chronology in mind. In Grade 8, we will explore the next centuries, leading up to the colonial era, dominated by British rule in India, and, ultimately, the struggle for freedom from the colonial rule, culminating in India’s independence.
Imagine you are in north India some 1,500 years ago. The mighty
Gupta Empire (see the chapter on the ‘Gupta Era’ in Part 1 of this textbook) has lost its dominance. You are a young traveller setting off on an adventure across the subcontinent. Your first stop is
Kannauj, a city by River Ganga where a powerful king hosts poets and scholars. A few weeks later, you reach the Chālukya kingdom in the Deccan, where you see magnificent temples and lively cities. In the far south, the Pallavas are carving entire temples out of rock at Māmallapuram (also known as Mahabalipuram), while in Bengal, the Pālas are supporting great universities such as Vikramaśhilā. You don’t see large empires in India now, but
Fig. 3.2.
6th 7th 8th 9th
9th century: The
Cholas emerge as a dominant
630–644: Xuanzang’s travels in India
712: Arabs conquer Sindh after several attempts
8th–9th centuries: Tripartite
Struggle over Kannauj
637: First Arab naval attack repulsed at
650: Start of the Bhakti tradition in south India
6th century:
Rise of the
Chālukya
Harṣhavardhana’s rule begins at the Pāla
6th to 8th century Pallava-Chālukya struggle
Tapestry of the Past
Empires and Kingdoms: 6th to 10th Centuries many strong kingdoms. Some call it a time of political rivalry and disorder, but as you travel, you see something different — a land buzzing with new ideas, art, and culture, different in each region, yet all part of one India.
Is this really the end of an age of powerful empires … or the dawn of a new era? Let’s step back in time and see. As you can see on the map (Fig. 3.3), the Guptas are gone, but the land is still dynamic and vibrant with activity. Several regional powers have emerged.
The ‘Great King of Kings’
As we look at northern India at this time, we find a remarkable ruler, Harṣhavardhana, ascending the throne in 606 CE at
Kannauj. He belonged to the Puṣhyabhūti (or Vardhana)
dynasty, whose earlier capital was Sthāneśhvara (present-day
Thanesar in Haryana).
Fig. 3.3. A simplified map of a few dynasties in north and peninsular India from the 7th century onward.
Mānyakheṭa
Godavari
Mahanadi
Ravi Beas
Ghaghara
Brahmaputra
Sthāneśhvara
Kānyakubja
Ujjayinī
G U R J A R A -
P R A T Ī H Ā R A S
70°E 75°E 85°E 80°E 90°E 95°E
P U Ṣ H Y
A B H Ū T I S
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
LET’S EXPLORE
Do you recall where the capital of the earlier Maurya and
Gupta empires was located?
How do you think this shift may have shaped the sub-continent’s politics in the years to come?
Fig. 3.4. A coin depicting King
Harṣha, and on the reverse side, a peacock fanning its tail.
Ruling from Kannauj (or Kanauj, anciently known as Kānyakubja, in present-day Uttar Pradesh),
Harṣhavardhana expanded his empire over large parts of northern and eastern India, although its precise extent is not known with certainty.
Fig. 3.5. A detail of a copper plate inscription (found at Banskhera in Uttar
Pradesh) in Nagari script, a precursor to Devanagari. It reads, ‘svahasto mama mahārājādhirāja śhrī harṣhasya’, that is, ‘By my own hand, the great king of kings, Śhrī Harṣha’.
LET’S EXPLORE
If you know the Devanagari script, with the help of your teacher try to identify some of the letters in Harṣha’s signature (Fig. 3.5).
Harṣha (as he is also known) was a fine poet and dramatist; he is assumed to be the author of three plays composed in classical
Sanskrit, which weave love stories with courtly life, or themes of sacrifice and other high ethical values. While these are ‘stories’, historians use such literature to extract interesting details about the culture and society of those times — from systems of governance to social diversity, technologies, foods, and clothing.
Harṣha also patronised scholars like Bāṇabhaṭṭa (also known
Tapestry of the Past
Empires and Kingdoms: 6th to 10th Centuries as Bāṇa), who wrote Kādambarī, a beautiful literary work and one of the world’s first novels. Bāṇa also composed a biography of Harṣha titled Harṣhacharita. Inscriptions depict Harṣha as a devotee of Śhiva; according to other sources, he was also deeply attached to Buddhism, while showing respect for all schools of thought and belief.
DON’T MISS OUT
The 7th-century novel Kādambarī has a very elaborate and complex plot. It tells of the love story between a prince from
Ujjayinī, and Kādambarī, a celestial being. Their romance runs across different births, dreams, and divine worlds, with a story often told within another story. On the way, we get glimpses of courtly life, philosophy, nature and aesthetics.
Bāṇa died before completing the novel; it was completed by his son, and is regarded as a masterpiece of classical Indian literature.
Apart from several inscriptions, an important historical source for the period is the travelogue kept by yet another Chinese pilgrim to India. Remember, in Part 1 of this textbook we met Faxian, who in the 5th century left a valuable account of the Gupta era. Now, two centuries later, Xuanzang (his name was earlier transcribed as Hsuan Tsang or Hiuen
Tsang) set out on his journey to India and travelled around the subcontinent between 630 and 644. (We met him briefly in the chapter ‘The Story of Indian
Farming’ in this textbook, and earlier in ‘India, That
Is Bharat’ in Grade 6.) Just as Faxian, his motivation for undertaking such a long and difficult journey was to visit sacred Buddhist sites and learn doctrines from Indian teachers; he brought back to China more than 600 manuscripts of Buddhist texts in Sanskrit (carried by 20 horses!) and set about translating them into Chinese. He also left a meticulous account of his
Fig. 3.6. A statue of
Xuanzang, carrying his travel pack, at the
Longmen Caves of eastern
China (a cave complex with many Buddhist statues and carvings)
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2 journey, in which he recorded important details about politics, diplomacy, culture and religion in the kingdoms he crossed. His travelogue is a major source of information for historians of this period.
LET’S EXPLORE
Looking at the map (Fig. 3.7), can you identify a few mountain passes or desert areas that Xuanzang had to cross while travelling between China and India?
Can you also identify a few important Buddhist centres of learning that Xuanzang visited in India? Do you know something of their significance?
Fig. 3.7. Xuanzang’s route from China to India and back. (In this map, we have used modern names for the cities Xuanzang passed through.)
90°E 85°E 80°E 75°E 70°E 65°E 95°E 105°E 100°E 110°E
Kanchipuram
Amaravati
Bhubaneswar
Ujjain Bodh Gaya
Guwahati
Prayagraj
Patna Mathura
Bamiyan Srinagar
Kashgar Samarkand
Tashkent
TAKLAMAKAN
DESERT Dunhuang
0 250 500 km
The travels of Xuanzang
Travel from China and in India
Travel back to China
Cities visited
Tapestry of the Past
Empires and Kingdoms: 6 th to 10 th Centuries
Harṣhavardhana welcomed this Chinese pilgrim to his court (apart from two more ambassadors from China). In
Xuanzang’s honour, he held an assembly at Kannauj, attended by kings and leaders of many religious sects. Xuanzang described Kannauj as a beautiful and prosperous city, and
Harṣha as a just and energetic ruler who maintained a vast army and was often engaged in military campaigns. Every five years, he held an assembly at Prayāga (present-day
Prayagraj, at the confluence of the Ganga and Yamuna rivers)
where, after performing sacred rites, he gave away much wealth, offering it to Buddhists, Brahmins, and the poor.
THINK ABOUT IT
Does the above ceremony remind you of a similar event discussed in Part 1 of this textbook?
Harṣha attempted to extend his empire southward beyond the Narmada, but was held in check by Pulakeśhin II of the powerful Chālukya dynasty, whom we will meet soon. Harṣha also dreamed of uniting northern
India, but achieved only mixed success. Although he formed an alliance with the Varman dynasty of Kāmarūpa (in today’s Assam; their capital Prāgjyotiṣha was close to today’s Guwahati), conflicts with neighbouring kingdoms continued.
A Tripartite Struggle for Kannauj
After Harṣha’s death in 647, north India saw much political turmoil. Kannauj became the centre of a long, indecisive
‘Tripartite Struggle’, as it is often called. The three warring parties were the Pālas from the east, the Gurjara-Pratīhāras from the west, and the Rāṣhṭrakūṭas from the Deccan
Tripartite:
A situation that involves distinct parties or
Fig. 3.8. A terracotta seal (approximately
13 cm in radius) found at Nālandā, issued by King Bhāskaravarmana of the
Varman dynasty, who was an ally of Harṣhavardhana.
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2 (see Fig. 3.3). During the 8th and 9th centuries, these three powers repeatedly warred against each other, with fluctuating outcomes and no lasting victor.
LET’S EXPLORE
Why was Kannauj so attractive to those powerful dynasties?
Observe its location on the map (Fig. 3.3) and discuss in class.
The Pālas
After Harṣha’s death, the Bengal region fell into disorder until, according to an inscription, the people chose Gopāla in 750 CE to restore stability; he was the first king of the Pāla dynasty, which soon ruled over much of eastern India. His successor,
Dharmapāla, expanded the Pāla Empire over much of eastern and northern India. He became known as a great patron of
Mahāyāna Buddhism (see Chapter ‘India and Her Neighbours’ in this textbook), founding major monasteries such as Vikramaśhilā (in present-day Bihar) and Somapura (in present-day Bangladesh). Besides, just like Harṣha, the Pālas continued to patronise Nālandā (see Chapter 7, ‘The
Gupta Era’ in Part 1 of this textbook).
Those large monasteries were, in effect, the universities of those times and attracted numerous students, sometimes from far away, even beyond India.
The Pāla Empire flourished economically thanks not only to internal trade, but also through brisk maritime trade through its seaports on the east coast, which provided pathways to Southeast Asia (see ‘India and Her Neighbours’ for some details).
Though the empire later declined, it left a lasting legacy of strong governance and learning in parts of eastern and northern
Fig. 3.9. Crowned Buddha, Bihar,
Pāla Empire, 10th–11th centuries
Tapestry of the Past
Empires and Kingdoms: 6th to 10th Centuries
THINK ABOUT IT
Some historians state that Dharmapāla was Buddhist; he certainly patronised Buddhist learning and institutions. But we should keep in mind that in ancient India, the concept of religion was more fluid than it is today, and except perhaps for monks and nuns, people could feel at ease with various belief systems and practise different modes of worship at the same time. Indeed, people often did not regard belief systems involving Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism as separate, but rather as branches of a common philosophical tree. Besides, rulers often took pride in patronising several schools of thought; we saw the case of the Guptas in Part 1 of this textbook, and Harṣha gives us one more example of such broad-mindedness. Similarly, several successors of
Dharmapāla, though still patronising Buddhist institutions, were said to be devotees of Śhiva. The Rāṣhṭrakūṭas (p. 71)
and other rulers will provide more examples of this.
A university with scholars as ‘gatekeepers’
Dharmapāla founded Vikramaśhilā in the late 8th century on the banks of the Ganga. It remained a great centre of learning for more than four centuries. The university had six colleges, monasteries, temples, lecture halls, and a vast library. Nearly
3,000 scholars studied subjects such as grammar, logic, Hindu and Buddhist philosophy, learning and rituals. Admission was highly selective as each college had a dvārapaṇḍita (‘scholar gatekeeper’) who tested students before allowing them entry.
Vikramaśhilā was especially known for its ties with Tibet; one of its famous teachers travelled to Tibet, translated Sanskrit works into Tibetan and played a major role in shaping Tibetan
Buddhism (also called Vajrayāna Buddhism, see Chapter ‘India and Her Neighbours’ in this textbook).
Such important centres of learning — there were hundreds, if not thousands, spread across India — kept alive and enriched
India’s long-standing knowledge traditions.
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
As we will see in the next chapter, Vikramaśhilā was plundered and destroyed by Bakhtiyār Khiljī in the 12th century.
Fig. 3.10. The cover of a manuscript from Vikramaśhilā, depicting five different aspects of the Buddha
The Gurjara-Pratīhāras
This dynasty, founded in the mid-8th century CE by Nāgabhaṭa I, probably originated from western India (‘Gurjara’ referred to a region between Gujarat and Rajasthan). As we will see later in this chapter, it gained fame for pushing back Arab invasions into northwest India. Their early capital was Bhillamāla (modern
Bhinmal in western Rajasthan); it seems to have shifted later to Ujjayinī.
In the 9th century, the celebrated Pratīhāra ruler, King Bhoja, a devotee of Viṣhṇu, built an empire stretching from Punjab and
Kathiawar (or Saurashtra) in the west to
Kannauj in the east, controlling most of north India. Bhoja was also known as ‘Mihira’ (a name of the Sun) and
Ādi Varāha (Varāha is an avatar of
Viṣhṇu in the form of a boar, see
Fig. 3.11), among other designations.
However, a century later, the
Gurjara-Pratīhāras suffered the destruction of Kannauj by Rāṣhṭrakūṭa rulers, which hastened the disintegration of their empire; it was finally eliminated in the early 11th century by the
Ghaznavids, whom we will meet in the next chapter.
Fig. 3.11. A Gurjara-Pratīhāra silver coin (about 2 cm in diameter) depicting
Varāha, an avatar of Viṣhṇu
Tapestry of the Past
Empires and Kingdoms: 6th to 10th Centuries
The Rāṣhṭrakūṭas
In the mid-8th century, Dantidurga became the first independent Rāṣhṭrakūṭa ruler when he overthrew the
Chālukyas in the Deccan (whom we will meet later in this chapter). The Rāṣhṭrakūṭas shifted their power centre to present-day Karnataka, with their capital at Mānyakheṭa (modern Malkheda) and were one of the most dominant powers for nearly two centuries, their empire spanning much of the subcontinent. Dantidurga’s successors campaigned successfully in north India, briefly occupying Kannauj.
We should not imagine that the kings of such dynasties were constantly at war. In fact, they found time and resources to create wonders. The Rāṣhṭrakūṭa king Krishna I got the magnificent Kailaśhanātha temple, the largest rock-cut temple in India (Fig. 3.12), carved out of a hillside at Ellora (in present-day Maharashtra). The Rāṣhṭrakūṭas equally patronised Hindu, Buddhist, and Jain schools of thought, and encouraged learning and literature in Sanskrit, Prakrit, and Kannada.
Fig. 3.12. A view of the Kailaśhanātha temple (also commonly known as Kailash temple), carved out of the hillside at Ellora; the temple is not a construction but a gigantic sculpture.
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
In the 9th century, another Rāṣhṭrakūṭa ruler,
Amoghavarṣha I, took on the title ‘Nṛipatunga’ or ‘peak of kings’. Despite frequent wars with neighbouring kingdoms, including those of the dynasties we surveyed above, he managed to ensure peace and prosperity in his empire — and stability, since his reign lasted for 64 years! Amoghavarṣha
Nṛipatunga is sometimes called a ‘Jain king’ as he was strongly drawn to Jainism; however, he also patronised Hindu temples. He was a fine poet too, who composed works in Sanskrit and Kannada.
<< Fig. 3.13. Inscription of the Rāṣhṭrakūṭa emperor
Amoghavarṣha Nṛipatunga in a village temple of Karnataka.
It is written in old Kannada script.
DON’T MISS OUT
‘Nrupatunga Road’ in central Bengaluru, home to several government buildings and institutions, is named after
Amoghavarṣha I.
THINK ABOUT IT
Al-Masūdī, a 10th-century Arab historian and traveller from
Baghdad, gave high praise to a Rāṣhṭrakūṭa ruler: “His troops and elephants are innumerable. … There is none among the rulers of Sindh and Hind who in his territory respects the
Muslims [as he does]. In his kingdom, Islam is honoured and protected. And, for them, mosques and congregational mosques, which are always full, have been built for offering prayers five times.”
What does this tell us about the Rāṣhṭrakūṭas?
While these three powerful dynasties — the Pālas, the Gurjara-
Pratīhāras, and the Rāṣhṭrakūṭas — were involved in the tussle over Kannauj, that is, over central India and the Gangetic plains, other powers rose and fell in other parts of India. It is not possible to survey them all; let us briefly visit a few.
Tapestry of the Past
Empires and Kingdoms: 6th to 10th Centuries
Far to the north, in the mid-8th century, a new power was stirring in the Himalayan kingdom of Kāśhmīra — present-day Kashmir.
Apart from inscriptions and coins, we learn about i
