Tapestry of the Past
Turning Tides: 11th and 12th Centuries
Turning Tides:
11th and 12th Centuries
It is the same India which has withstood the shocks of centuries, of hundreds of foreign invasions, of hundreds of upheavals of manners and customs. It is the same land which stands firmer than any rock in the world, with its undying vigour, indestructible life. Its life is of the same nature as the soul, without beginning and without end, immortal; and we are the children of such a country.
— Swami Vivekananda
1. Why are the 11th and 12th centuries seen as a period of transition in Indian history?
2. Which new powers emerged during this period? What were the essential features of their economic, military and administrative systems?
3. What high accomplishments in art, architecture, literature, science, etc., do we come across during this period?
Questions
Fig. 4.1. A bas-relief depicting soldiers and elephants preparing for war (from Lakṣhmaṇa Temple, Khajuraho)
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
In the previous chapter, we saw the Arabs’ repeated attempts to invade and dominate north India and how, in the end, those incursions had little overall impact on India. The 11th and 12th centuries tell a different story: invasions by Turkic powers penetrated much deeper into north India, despite stubborn resistance from native kingdoms.
We begin the chapter with an invasion and end the chapter with another, with a very brief account of the wars and destruction that came in their wake. However, many Indian rulers also flourished in this time period, successfully battling the invaders at times (when they were not battling each other), conducting naval expeditions, creating astonishing monuments or projecting
India’s influence abroad. Many poets, philosophers, saints and scientists belong to this period and their works continue to illuminate us even today.
In this chapter we will only explore a few of these important events, figures and accomplishments.
Refers to peoples, languages, cultures historically associated with a vast stretching
Asia, all the way to
Turkey and
Siberia.
950 1000 1050 1100
985–1014: Reign of
Rājarāja Chola I
1000–08: Mahmūd of Ghazni’s campaigns against the Hindu Shāhis
1014–44: Reign of
Rājendra Chola I
1010–55 : Reign of
Paramāra king Bhoja century:
Rise of the
Kākatīyas
1025: Rājendra
Chola’s naval expedition to
Southeast Asia
1026: Mahmūd destroys and plunders the
Somnath temple
Fig. 4.2.
Tapestry of the Past
Turning Tides: 11 th and 12 th Centuries
THINK ABOUT IT
A word of caution: In Grade 8 you will read a ‘Note on
History’s Darker Periods’. Briefly, it explains how history has recorded war, conquest and destruction more than peace, good governance or creativity, and how, the world over, historians have sometimes hesitated to draw attention to such darker periods. Our approach is that it is better to face them and analyse them so as to understand what made such developments possible and, hopefully, help avoid their recurrence in future. In addition, we should not forget that while past events cannot be erased or denied, it would be wrong to hold anyone responsible for them today.
The Ghaznavid Invasions
In the 9th and 10th centuries, several kingdoms confronted each other in present-day Afghanistan and northern Pakistan.
Across those two regions and all the way to Punjab, there ruled a
1150 1200 1250 1300
1205-06:
Bakhtiyār defeated in
Kāmarūpa
12th century (1st half): Angkor
Wat temple constructed in
Cambodia
1206: Deaths of
Muhammad Ghurī and Bakhtiyār
Bhāskarāchārya composes Līlāvatī
1192: 2nd Battle of Tarain:
Muhammad Ghurī defeats
Pṛithvīrāja III
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2 powerful dynasty known as Hindu Shāhis. With the help of several other Indian rulers, they resisted several attempted invasions. This resistance made a difference, since they controlled the Khyber Pass, one of the main mountain passes through the Hindu Kush range (see Fig. 4.3 and 4.4). In the course of India’s history, many invaders used this pass to enter the
Subcontinent; for at least 2,500 years, it was also a major trade route, connecting the Subcontinent to Central Asia and beyond, and the route Buddhist scholars and monks travelled.
LET’S EXPLORE
Observe the sketch of the Khyber Pass (Fig. 4.3). What kind of terrain does it depict?
Æ What advantages would it offer to an army trying to reach the Indus plains? But also, what dangers?
Æ Thinking of the caravans of traders that passed through the Khyber Pass for many centuries, let’s ask the same questions about the advantages as well as dangers.
Fig. 4.3. The Khyber Pass, as painted by a British military officer in about 1847.
Ultimately, however, a Turkic power — the Ghaznavids — after defeating a rival Muslim kingdom, overran the Shāhis, ruled at
Tapestry of the Past
Turning Tides: 11th and 12th Centuries the time by Jayapāla. As their name indicates, the Ghaznavids’ capital was Ghazna, today’s Ghazni in Afghanistan. In the first decade of the 11th century, their ruler Mahmūd (often referred to as ‘Mahmūd of Ghazni’) accomplished this final conquest, first defeating Jayapāla and, in 1008, overcoming Jayapāla’s son
Ānandapāla after a long battle, despite the support Ānandapāla received from several rulers from north India. The outcome of that battle, waged in northern Punjab, meant that Mahmūd now had easy access to the Indus plains and beyond.
THINK ABOUT IT
We will meet later in this chapter the Persian scholar al-Bīrūnī, who accompanied Mahmūd in some of his campaigns. He wrote in his memoirs on India, “The Hindu Shāhiya dynasty is now extinct, and of the whole house there is no longer the slightest remnant in existence. We must say that, in all their grandeur, they never slackened in the ardent desire of doing that which is good and right, that they were men of noble sentiment and noble bearing.”
What conclusions can we draw from this remark by someone in Mahmūd’s entourage?
DON’T MISS OUT
Mahmūd assumed the title of ‘sultan’, a word of Arabic origin which means ‘authority’ or ‘power’; in the Muslim world, it came to refer to a sovereign ruler or king. In
Grade 8, we will come across sultans who established their kingdoms or ‘sultanates’ in India, the dominant one being the
Delhi Sultanate.
In all, Mahmūd conducted 17 campaigns in India; after each one, he would return to Ghazni with huge amounts of booty.
Although he met with strong resistance (from the Chandellas of central India, among others) and was close to defeat on a few occasions, his large army’s rapid marches and daring cavalry attacks, with archers on horseback, were ultimately decisive.
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
0 250 500 km
70°E 75°E 85°E 90°E 80°E 95°E
Capital city
BAY OF BENGAL
Godavari
Mahanadi
PARAMĀRAS
Aṇahilavāḍa
Ajayameru
Mahotsavanagara
Dhillikā
Prāgjyotiṣhapura
Brahmaputra
K Ā M A R Ū P A
S E N A S
C H A N D E L L A S
Ghaghara
G H A Z N A V I D S
CHĀHAMĀNAS
G H Ū R I D S
Fig. 4.4. A few dynasties in northern and central India in the 11th and 12th centuries
When Mahmūd reached Mathura (in present-day western Uttar
Pradesh) in 1018, he found it to be a city of enormous wealth, with a magnificent temple overlooking the city. Mahmūd’s court historian al-Utbi, who chronicled his campaigns, wrote that even
“the pens of all writers and the pencils of all painters” would be unable to describe the temple’s “beauty and decoration”.
Mahmūd destroyed it and plundered its treasure, then proceeded to Kannauj, where he took one of the last Pratihāra rulers by surprise, and looted and destroyed many temples. A few years later, another campaign took him to Gujarat and to Somnath (in present-day Saurashtra), which was then a bustling seaport.
Despite strong resistance from the locals and severe losses to his army, after a few days of fighting Mahmūd gained the upper hand, destroyed the Somanātha Śhiva temple and looted its enormous treasures.
Tapestry of the Past
Turning Tides: 11th and 12th Centuries
LET’S EXPLORE
In later centuries, the Somanātha temple was rebuilt and destroyed again several times; the existing temple was built in 1950 and inaugurated the next year by the then President of India, Rajendra Prasad. Why do you think it was decided to fund the construction entirely from public donations?
Mahmūd died in 1030 in Ghazni, at the age of 58. About this time, his nephew, Sālār Masūd, launched an attack on the Gangetic region. According to oral history and to a 17th-century Muslim chronicle, when he reached Bahraich (in modern-day Uttar
Pradesh), the local ruler Suheldev (or Suhaldev) successfully resisted the attack and Sālār Masūd fell in the battle.
Mahmūd’s campaigns involved not only destruction and plunder, but also the slaughter of tens of thousands of Indian civilians and the capture of numerous prisoners, including children, who were taken to be sold on slave markets of Central Asia. His biographers depict him as a powerful but cruel and ruthless general, keen not only to slaughter or enslave ‘infidels’ (that is, Hindus or Buddhists or Jains), but also to kill believers from rival sects of Islam.
Fig. 4.5. Ruins of a temple complex in today’s Amb Shareef (northern
Pakistan), built during the rule of the Hindu Shāhis
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1
Al-Bīrūnī
Abū Rayḥān al-Bīrūnī, a Persian scholar from
Khwārizm (in present-day Uzbekistan), was a mathematician, astronomer, geographer, historian and linguist all rolled into one. He travelled widely and wrote prolifically, both in
Arabic and Persian, on nearly every branch of knowledge known in his time.
Around 1017, al-Bīrūnī accompanied Mahmūd of Ghazni on his campaign into India. He learned Sanskrit, read Indian texts and conversed with Indian scholars. The result was an encyclopaedic survey of Indian religion, philosophy, literature, geography, and sciences, in which he discussed Indian intellectual achievements as best he could, often comparing them with those of Greek and Islamic traditions. In mathematics and astronomy, al-Bīrūnī compiled what he could gather from the works of Āryabhaṭa, Varāhamihira and
Brahmagupta, among others. In another work, he translated into
Arabic Patanjali’s Yogasūtras, a classic text on advanced concepts and techniques of yoga.
At the same time, al-Bīrūnī noted the impact of Mahmūd’s military campaigns on India’s scientific traditions: “Mahmūd utterly ruined the prosperity of the country, and performed there wonderful feats, by which the Hindus became like atoms of dust scattered in all directions. ... This is the reason, too, why Indian sciences have retired far away from those parts of the country conquered by us, and have fled to places which our hand cannot yet reach; to Kashmir, Varanasi, and other places.”
Bhāskarāchārya
While the production and transmission of scientific knowledge did decline in north India a little later, they continued to flourish in other regions. Born in 1114, probably in present-day
Maharashtra, Bhāskara II, better known as Bhāskarāchārya, was
Fig. 4.6. A 1973 postage stamp issued by the former Soviet
Union in memory of al-Bīrūnī (Uzbekistan was then part of the
Soviet Union).
Tapestry of the Past
Turning Tides: 11 th and 12 th Centuries one of India’s greatest mathematicians and astronomers. His family counted several scholars and astronomers. His most famous works (all in Sanskrit) are Līlāvatī, which uses lively riddles and problems to teach basic mathematics; Bījagaṇita, on more advanced algebra;
and Siddhāntaśhiromaṇi (‘Crown of Treatises on Mathematical
Astronomy’), which deals with advanced astronomical calculations.
Many later scholars wrote commentaries on those works, and several of them were translated into Persian during the Mughal period; as a result, his influence in India and beyond was long-lasting. It would take Europe a few centuries to rediscover some of Bhāskarāchārya’s pioneering techniques.
In addition to his scientific knowledge, Bhāskarāchārya had a gift for poetry and used this talent to make his writings enjoyable to scholars and students alike. His works were full of examples, with clear explanations, demonstrations and proofs, making them favourite texts with students for centuries. Remember that you saw such examples in your Mathematics textbooks of Grade 7. Here is an example from Līlāvatī — see if you can find the solution!
Of a herd of elephants, half and one-third of the half went into a cave, one-sixth and one-seventh of one-sixth were drinking water from a river. One-eighth and one-ninth of one-eighth were sporting in a pond full of lotuses. And the king of the elephants was leading three female elephants. Tell me, how many elephants were there in the herd?
Fig. 4.7. A 17th-century manuscript illustrating another problem from
Līlāvatī, with a peacock perched on top of a pillar and a snake below.
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
As Mahmūd did not attempt to establish a permanent base in
India beyond Punjab, historians have debated his motives for conducting such destructive campaigns; they have often suggested that plunder was the chief reason for his destruction of temples in India. It is true that the larger temples often held immense wealth, accumulated from the devotees’ offerings over centuries, and would therefore be prime targets for plunder.
But it is also true that Mahmūd was keen to spread his version of Islam to non-Muslim parts of the world, as we find from contemporary evidence. Al-Utbi, for instance, noted, “Wherever he went, Mahmūd plundered and sacked the country until it was annihilated. He dug up and burnt down all its buildings, killed those infidels and carried away their children and cattle as booty. He mastered several other territories, and destroying their temples, their sacred buildings, built mosques instead, making the light of Islam visible.” Let us also refer again to al-Bīrūnī, who, after explaining the origin of the śhivalinga worshipped
Fig. 4.8. A painting depicting an Indian ruler brought to Mahmūd as a prisoner (manuscript of a 15th-century historical work in Persian)
Tapestry of the Past
Turning Tides: 11 th and 12 th Centuries
Fig. 4.9. A coin issued from Lahore by Mahmūd, with one side in Arabic and the other in Sanskrit, praising
Islam and Mahmūd as ‘nṛipati’ or king.
at the Somnath temple, recorded,
“The image was destroyed by the
Prince Mahmūd. He ordered the upper part to be broken and the remainder to be transported to his residence, Ghazni. [A part of the image] lies before the door of the mosque of Ghazni, on which people rub their feet to clean them from dirt and wet.”
Eastern India
While north India bore the brunt of the Ghaznavid raids, during the 11th century the scene in eastern India was very different. After the decline of the Pālas, the Sena dynasty (Fig. 4.4) emerged as the dominant power over much of Bengal, with their capital at Nādīya (now the Nadia district, which shares a border with Bangladesh).
Their relations with neighbouring Kāmarūpa (Assam) and Kalinga (more or less present-day Odisha) seem to have alternated between friendly and conflictual. While their predecessors, the Pālas, patronised Buddhist institutions, the Senas promoted Hindu thought and literature, hosting poets such as Jayadeva, author of the famous
Gītagovindam, which tells the story of Kṛiṣhṇa and Rādhā.
Let us follow the coast southward, into Kalinga where we encounter the Eastern Gangas (Fig. 4.4), who had matrimonial alliances with the Cholas (whom we will meet soon), yet also clashed with them a few times, and with other neighbours as well. Nevertheless, by the end of the 12th century the Eastern Gangas emerged as one of the most stable powers of eastern India, with their kingdom extending
‘from the Gangā to the Godāvarī,’ as some of their inscriptions claim.
This dynasty initiated the construction of the Jagannātha temple at
Puri, and, in the mid-13th century, of the grand Sun temple at Konark.
Further South
Let us continue our journey southward. From the previous chapter, do you remember the Western Chālukyas (with their capital at
Kalyāṇī or Kalyāṇa) and the Eastern Chālukyas (Fig. 4.10)? The
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2 former was a major power in the Deccan, its rule extending at some point to the Narmada River in the north. As the Eastern
Chālukyas were gradually absorbed into the Chola sphere of influence through marriage alliances, their capital Vengi and the fertile region around it became the object of fierce wars between the Cholas and the Western Chālukyas. As a result, the
Western Chālukyas faded away, while the Kākatīyas and the
Hoysalas grew stronger, eventually replacing them. Let us now turn to them.
70°E 80°E 75°E 85°E
INDIAN OCEAN
0 250 500 km
Capital city
Orugallu
Madurai Tanjāvūr
Gangaikoṇḍacholapuram
Velapura
Tungabhadra
Dvārasamudra
AS Kalyāṇī
Godavari
Fig. 4.10. A few dynasties of south India in the 11th and 12th centuries
The Kākatīyas
In 12th century, the Kākatīyas cemented their authority over much of present-day Telangana and Andhra Pradesh (Fig. 4.10), with their capital at Orugallu (today’s Warangal), where they built a fort with impressive stone toraṇas or gateways (Fig. 4.11).
While some of their kings composed works in Sanskrit, they also patronised Telugu literature; the Thousand Pillar temple at
Hanamkonda is a fine example of their temple architecture.
Tapestry of the Past
Turning Tides: 11th and 12th Centuries
The Kākatīya rulers promoted a strong local administration based on village self-governance; they developed an efficient revenue system and an irrigation infrastructure that supported agricultural prosperity.
The Hoysalas
The Hoysalas originated in southern Karnataka. There is an interesting legend behind the name. When their founder
Sāla went to a Jain temple for worship, he found an ascetic meditating; as a tiger appeared on the scene, the ascetic said
“Poy, Sāla” — which, in
