Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions
5 – India, a Home to Many a Home to Many ayam nijah paro veti gaṇanā laghucetasām udāracharitānām tu vasudhaiva kutumbakam
“This is mine, that is not mine,” so think the narrow-minded.
For the noble-minded, the whole world is family.
— Hitopadeśha
Learn to make the whole world your own. No one is a stranger, my child; the whole world is your own.
— Last message of Sri Sarada Devi (spiritual consort of Sri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa)
Questions
1. What has made India a home for people from different parts of the world?
2. Why did oppressed or persecuted people from other countries seek refuge in India?
3. What is it about the nature of Indian society that enables people to assimilate here?
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
In the chapter “Unity in Diversity, or ‘Many in the One’ ” (Grade 6 Social Science textbook), we read that “many Indians may be called migrants, in the sense of people not living near their birthplace or with their original community.” In this chapter, we will explore another type of migrants — people who came to India from other parts of the world and settled here, adding another dimension to the diversity. There have been many such migrant communities in India’s history, up to recent times. We cannot cover them all in this chapter and have selected only a few representative examples.
THINK ABOUT IT
Æ Imagine this scenario — A stranger knocks at your door at midnight. It is raining heavily outside, and the stranger seeks shelter for the night claiming that his car broke down while he was driving in the vicinity.
Your family goes into a huddle to discuss the pros and cons of letting a stranger into the house at night. Form two groups to discuss the arguments for and against in this scenario.
Æ Now extend this scenario to a country like India — when refugees seek shelter in India, will similar arguments apply?
Jews are members of the people cultural community originating from the
Hebrews of
Israel and traditionally linked to the religion of
Judaism. A
Jew may be identified either by from Jewish ancestry or through conversion.
identity may therefore be defined on the basis of religion, culture, history, or ethnicity.
The Story of Indian Jews
Jews sought sanctuary in India in several waves. The persecution of Jews in various countries led to them having to flee their homes. India has proved to be a safe haven where they can practise their faith without fear.
The Bene Israel are a Jewish community that lived on the
Konkan coast, just south of Mumbai. According to some scholars, they came around 175 BCE, from the ancient
Kingdom of Israel. On their journey, their ship was caught in a storm and shipwrecked near the coast. The survivors
Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions
5 – India, a Home to Many settled in India and started a new life. Although they lost their holy books, they remembered their prayer, which says there is only one God. Over time, the Bene Israel grew to become the largest Jewish community in India, numbering over 25,000 shortly after India gained independence.
Several groups arrived much later, between the 12th and 19th centuries, again facing persecution in their respective countries.
Some Jews settled near Cochin (present-day Kochi). The Raja of
Kochi granted them land free of cost “as long as the world, sun, and moon endure.” The Jews built a synagogue, which enabled them to practise their faith even as they became part of the
Indian society.
Synagogue:
A place of worship for Jews where religious services and special ceremonies like weddings are
Fig. 5.1. Swami Vivekananda
Swami Vivekananda, in his speech delivered at the World Parliament of
Religions held at Chicago in
1893, had these memorable
I am proud to belong to a nation which has sheltered the persecuted and the refugees of all religions and all nations of the Earth. I am proud to tell you that we have gathered in our bosom the purest remnant of the Israelites, who came to Southern India and took refuge with us in the very year in which their holy temple was shattered to pieces by Roman tyranny.
I am proud to belong to the religion which has sheltered and is still fostering the remnant of the grand Zoroastrian nation.
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
LET’S EXPLORE
Look at the two pictures below. Is the place shown in both the photographs the same? Why is the Maharaja of Travancore (the name of the kingdom in and around Kochi at that time)
giving such an expensive gift to the Jewish synagogue for the
Torah (religious book of the Jews)?
Fig. 5.2. A plaque in the Kochi synagogue.
Fig. 5.3. The interior of the synagogue at Kochi.
Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions
5 – India, a Home to Many
LET’S EXPLORE
Observe the picture Fig. 5.4. What clues do you get about the integration of the Jewish community into Indian society over time?
The Syriac Christian Community
From the 4th centuries CE, some Christian groups who used the ancient Syriac language in their worship and traditions faced difficulties in West Asia. Under the Roman Empire, they were sometimes treated as heretics because some of their beliefs about Christ were different from those of the official Church.
In the Persian Empire, they were suspected of secretly helping the Romans, who were enemies of Persia, and were persecuted as a result. To escape such persecutions, some Syriac Christians travelled eastward along trade routes and reached the Malabar coast of India (present-day Kerala), where they could live and worship freely. In India, Syriac Christians are also called ‘Syrian
Christians’; they are divided into several sects.
Heretic:
A person considered to be holding (especially religious contrary to those of the dominant
Persecution:
Hostility, generally arising from religious, ethnic, social or political motives, accompanied harassment or violence.
Fig. 5.4. A Jewish family in Mumbai, late 19th century.
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
LET’S EXPLORE
Observe the pictures below. What are the clues you get about the integration of the Syriac Christian community into Indian society?
Fig. 5.5. A Syriac (Syrian) Christian wedding ceremony.
The Legend of the Parsi Wise Man,
Milk, and Sugar
The Parsis (followers of Zoroastrianism) came to India primarily to escape religious persecution in Persia (modern- day Iran) after the Islamic conquest of Persia in the
7th century CE. Zoroastrianism was the state religion of the mighty Sassanid Empire (3rd to 7th centuries). After the empire fell to Arab Muslim forces in the middle of the 7th century, Zoroastrians faced religious persecution in many forms — forced conversions to Islam, religious taxes (jizya), destruction of their sacred fire temples, as well as social and legal marginalisation. They were, therefore, forced to flee Persia. Unable to freely practise their faith, groups of
Zoroastrians made the courageous choice to leave their homeland and sail across the Arabian Sea. Several groups of them reached India’s western coast (in present-day Gujarat)
between the 8th and 10th centuries.
Zoroastrianism:
Zoroastrianism, one of the world’s oldest religions, was founded by the prophet
Zarathushtra in Central Asia.
It is based on the worship of one God,
Ahurā Mazdā.
Choosing good over evil is an important aspect of this
Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions
5 – India, a Home to Many
The Parsis carried little with them — their sacred fire and some hope to make a home in a place they had heard was safe,
India. Raja Jadi Rāṇā was the king of Sanjān, in coastal Gujarat. According to a legend, the Parsis approached the Raja for a safe place to stay. Since they were unfamiliar with each other’s languages, the
Raja showed them a jug full of milk, indicating that the kingdom was full and could not accommodate more people. A wise man among the Parsis took a spoon of sugar and dissolved it into the milk without allowing the milk to spill over. Jadi Rāṇā was pleased and provided a secure place for them to settle in his kingdom.
THINK ABOUT IT
What do you think dissolving the sugar in the milk without spilling it meant?
The ancient sacred fire continues to burn in Udvada, a short distance from where the Parsis first arrived. They combined their ancient traditions with those of the local culture. Today
India has the largest population of followers of Zoroastrianism in the world. The Parsis continue to live in India and enrich various aspects of its society.
Fig. 5.6. An 18th-century Parsi fire temple in Udvada (south Gujarat), close to the place where the Parsis first reached India.
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
LET’S EXPLORE
This painting of a Parsi bride getting ready for her wedding shows many aspects of Indian culture. Do any of them seem familiar to you? Based on what you see, can you draw any conclusions about the integration of Parsi culture in India?
Fig. 5.7. Decking the Bride, a painting by Raja Ravi Varma
There are deep connections between the philosophy of Zoroastrianism and India’s ancient Vedic schools of thought. For example, they share the same concept of a cosmic order holding the universe together. Their rituals also show similarities, since both give much importance to fire worship.
There are also interesting differences: in the Vedas, the devas are beneficial gods; in the Avesta, the Parsis’ ancient sacred text, daevas are evil gods who drive towards chaos; the Avesta’s chief god is Ahurā, but in India (after the Vedic period), asuras are seen as harmful powers or demons.
As you can see, there are also similarities between the two languages. Indeed, Old Avestan (the language of the Avesta) and
Vedic Sanskrit share many word roots and also grammatical features. A few more examples (with the Vedic word on the left and the Avestan word on the right):
• soma (a divine drink) = haoma
• hotar (a priest) = haotar
• yajña (sacrifice) = yasna.
There is much more to show that there are deep spiritual and linguistic ties between ancient Iran and ancient India.
Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions
5 – India, a Home to Many
The Arab Merchant Community
Arab merchants came to
India from the 7th century onward, and many of them settled along the west coast in places like Kerala, Gujarat, and Karnataka. They traded spices and other goods, married local women, and formed new communities.
In Kerala, they became part of the Mappila Muslim community, and helped build
India’s oldest mosque, the
Cheraman Juma Masjid. These early Arab settlers in India came as peaceful traders, not as conquerors. They brought new ideas, culture, and religion, and played an important role in India’s history of trade and cultural exchange.
The African Connection
We have a different kind of story with the Siddis. The Siddis are of African origin; enslaved there, they were brought to India as slaves of Arab, Portuguese, and British traders between the 7th and 19th centuries. In the 18th century, some Siddis gained prominence in Muslim rulers’ armies and briefly controlled
Fig. 5.8. Cheraman Juma Mosque, Kerala
Fig. 5.9. Young Siddi girl from Karnataka Fig. 5.10. Siddi woman from Karnataka
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2 parts of Bengal. Their cultural identity represents a fusion of
African and Indian traditions. The Siddis have a distinctive dance accompanied by African-style drumming. Over time, they have adapted their language to regional influences and integrated
African religious practices with adopted faiths of Hinduism,
Islam, or Christianity. The Siddis are designated as a scheduled tribe. However, the Siddis’ overall economic condition remains poor and efforts are being made to provide them with better access to education and livelihood options.
LET’S EXPLORE
What clues do you get about African and Indian cultural integration from the pictures here and above? Identify and name a few features that are distinctly Indian.
Fig. 5.11. Siddi dancers
Fig. 5.12. Hirabai Lobi
Hirabai Lobi was from the Siddi community that settled in Gujarat.
She worked hard for the upliftment of the women of her community, connecting them with banking services, educating them on organic farming and other livelihood options. She was awarded the
Padma Shri in 2023 for her selfless service to the community.
Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions
5 – India, a Home to Many
The Armenians in India
Armenia is a relatively small, mountainous country located between
Turkey and Azerbaijan, just north of Iran.
Centuries ago, Armenian merchants traded in
Indian spices and fine muslins. There is some historical evidence of them establishing a first settlement on the
Malabar coast in the 8th century. During the time of the Mughals in the
16th century (you will meet them in Grade 8) many Armenians from Persia gained patronage from the emperors and began developing settlements in India.
The earliest such Armenian settlement was in Agra where the Mughal emperor, Akbar, gave them permission to build a church and follow their Christian religious practices. Armenians began to play important roles in the Mughal royal household, the army, as well as the administration during the time of several
Mughal emperors. For example, Abdul Hai was Chief Justice in
Akbar’s court while Lady Juliana was a doctor in the royal palace.
The Armenians also settled in Surat, Kolkata, and Chennai, building schools, churches, and cemeteries, and creating a lasting cultural impact. Kolkata became a major Armenian hub.
The 18th-century Armenian College and Mother Mary Church continue to be active. Their story reflects India’s tradition of embracing diverse communities seeking refuge and prosperity.
The thriving trade routes of Madras (present-day Chennai), drew
Armenian merchants who settled there around the mid-17th century. They became influential in commerce, especially dealing in silk, spices, and precious stones, and left a lasting mark on the
Fig. 5.13. Armenian Christmas at Armenian church, Kolkata.
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2 city’s economic and cultural history. Armenian Street in George
Town memorialises their presence, while the St. Mary’s Armenian
Church, built in the mid-18th century, stands as a symbol of their faith. Though the once-flourishing Armenian population has dwindled over the centuries, a handful of families and heritage groups continue to preserve their architectural, mercantile, and spiritual legacy in Chennai.
The Baha’i Community in India
In the mid-1800s, a new religion called the Baha’i began in
Persia (modern-day Iran), led by a man named Baha’u’llah. His teachings spoke of unity among all people and harmony between religions. The ruling religious leadership in
Iran, however, branded them as heretics because of their different beliefs, and they were treated badly. Some Baha’is looked for safer places to live, and one of the first places they came to was
India. Baha’is had started arriving in India during the late 19th century. Over the years, many Indians joined the faith. The Baha’is welcome people of all religions and backgrounds. Though Iranian Baha’is came to India to escape danger, most Baha’is here today are
Indians who believe in the faith’s message of unity and love.
The ‘Good Maharaja’ and the Polish
Children
If you happen to visit the Good Maharaja Square in Warsaw,
Poland, you may be surprised to see this monument (Fig. 5.15).
There is an inspiring story behind this. Poland was invaded during the Second World War, which took place between 1939
Fig. 5.14. The Baha’i Lotus Temple in New Delhi
Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions
5 – India, a Home to Many and 1945. Thousands of families were torn apart, and many children were orphaned. Digvijaysinhji Ranjitsinhji
Jadeja, the Maharaja of Nawanagar
State (present-day Jamnagar), was touched by this tragedy. He mobilised the Red Cross and other organisations to help him rescue the children and take them to Jamnagar, and provided them with a safe place to stay, food to eat and cared for them. He is credited with saving the lives of around a thousand Polish orphans between
1942 and 1946. Several thousand
Polish refugees fleeing from other areas were also welcomed to stay in the safety of his state. The children and others returned home safely after the war ended.
In the early 21st century, his service to the people of Poland was recognised by the President of Poland and the monument was constructed in the Maharaja’s honour. India was a home away from home, even if for a brief period, for the orphaned children.
Tibetan Refugees in India
Located on the other side of the Himalayan range, Tibet is India’s northern neighbour. In the 7th century, the ‘Land of Snows’, as
Tibet is sometimes called, became a centre of Buddhism when its king embraced the Buddha’s teachings. Gradually, despite a few setbacks, Buddhism expanded in Tibet.
During the 12th and 13th centuries, Turko-Afghan military invasions in eastern India led to the destruction of Nā landā and other Buddhist centres of learning (see ‘Turning Tides: 11th and
12th Centuries’ in this textbook). Many monks left for Tibet, often taking precious manuscripts of Sanskrit texts with them.
From the 15th century onward, the Dalai Lamas, each one said
Fig. 5.15. Memorial in Warsaw: A tribute to
Digvijaysinhji Ranjitsinhji in recognition of his help to Polish refugees during World War II.
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2 to be his predecessor’s reincarnation, assumed a greater role, eventually becoming spiritual heads and (from the mid-17th century) Tibet’s rulers.
DON’T MISS OUT
Tibetans, soon after taking refuge in India in 1959, started propagating their traditional system of medicine called Sowa
Rigpa (also known as ‘Art of Healing’); it was codified in the
8th century CE by a medical council held near Lhasa in Tibet, and blends ancient principles and practices of Ayurveda with
