A developed India will be one where urban and rural areas have the same infrastructure — roads, power, water, and communication.
— APJ Abdul Kalam
Questions
1. What is physical infrastructure, and how has it transformed over the years in India?
2. How has the expansion in infrastructure affected the quality of life for individuals and communities?
3. What is the role of infrastructure in the development and economic prosperity of the nation?
Infrastructure: Engine of India’s Development
Fig. 7.1. State-of-the-art physical infrastructure
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
Introduction
Imagine you wake up one morning, ready for school. But when you step outside, there are no roads. The buses are gone. No one’s mobile phone has any signal. The lights won’t turn on, the internet is gone, and the tap is running dry! How would you reach school?
How would groceries, and stationery reach your nearest market and your home? How would you access utilities like electricity and water? This is what life might look like without physical infrastructure, which is a vast network of tangible structures built to keep our cities and villages functioning. It includes transportation systems (roads, bridges, railways, etc.), utilities (electricity, water pipelines), communication networks (internet, telephone lines, telecom towers, etc.), energy infrastructure (windmills, solar parks, oil and gas pipelines, etc.) and so on.
Delhi-Meerut
Expressway
World’s highest railway bridge –
Chenab Rail Bridge, Jammu & Kashmir
India’s longest sea bridge – Atal Setu, Maharashtra
Economic Life Around Us
7 – Infrastructure: Engine of India’s Development
Fig. 7.2. Some forms of physical infrastructure
Why is physical infrastructure important?
Vishakhapatnam port,
Andhra Pradesh
Bhakra Nangal Dam,
Himachal Pradesh
Muppandal Wind Farm,
Tamil Nadu
Solar power project at Cochin
International Airport, Kerala
One bright morning, Rishabh packed his bags for a two-day trip from Delhi to his hometown, Talegaon in Nashik, Maharashtra.
He started off in his car, zoomed across a wide bridge and then parked the car at the metro station.
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
Soon he was on a train, rushing past green fields and towns. He called his mother and shared his location using his smartphone.
He hopped onto the metro to skip the heavy traffic and quickly reached the railway station.
After reaching closer to home, he rode a bus that moved through many flyovers.
He was seated right next to Satish, a hardworking tomato farmer from
Maharashtra, who was returning from the mandi after selling his harvest.
Rishabh saw some of the tomatoes in his bag kept right next to him. He remarked “Ahh! Such red and juicy tomatoes”. Satish told him that his juicy red tomatoes were not just a gift of sunshine and rain.
It was possible because canals and electric water pumps helped irrigation, good roads helped trucks carry his tomatoes to the city, cold storage kept them fresh, and the internet helped him know about the best inputs and market prices. They both wondered how important is the physical infrastructure which is connected like pieces of a puzzle, helping safe and timely travel of people and goods.
Finally, Rishabh got off at the bus stand, boarded an autorickshaw that dropped him at his door.
Fig. 7.3. Rishabh's journey
Economic Life Around Us
7 – Infrastructure: E n g i n e o f
India’s D e v e l o p m e n t
Physical infrastructure is the backbone of our nation — it makes life easier for people, communities, businesses, and enables government to function smoothly. For instance, transport systems like roads, railways, airways, and shipping connect places of origin or manufacturing of goods and services to the nearest markets. India has had a network of trade routes since ancient times, and today’s modern infrastructure has taken this forward to boost trade, both within and outside the country. Better infrastructure also supports tourism, connects remote areas, and helps during emergencies like floods or earthquakes. It also strengthens national security by improving access to all kinds of terrain for the defence forces.
THINK ABOUT IT
Æ What might happen to Satish’s efforts if any part of the infrastructure is missing?
Æ What happens when a new highway is built near a village?
How does it impact the lives of the people living nearby?
Æ Imagine if there were no internet or phone services. How would this affect people’s ability to work or learn?
Transportation Infrastructure
How do you and your family members commute to nearby and far-off places? Let’s learn about the transportation infrastructure that enables the mobility of people and goods.
a) Road and highway network
Did you know? India has the second-largest road network in the world, only after the United States of America (2024). There are many types of roads. The local roads near your home help children reach school, farmers carry crops to markets, and ambulances reach hospitals. Then there are the bigger roads like state highways connecting towns and districts within a state along with other bigger highways. These are built and maintained by states through their public works departments. Then, national highways and
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
Fig. 7.4. Dense network of roadways in India expressways are like super fast roads that join cities across states, and are built and maintained by the central government.
They connect with other infrastructure like railway stations, airports, and ports so that goods and people can travel smoothly.
Economic Life Around Us
7 – Infrastructure: Engine of India’s Development
Fig. 7.5. Dhola Sadiya Bridge, Assam Fig. 7.6. Living root bridge (called jingkieng jri in Khasi), Meghalaya
DON’T MISS OUT
As of 2025, the length of India’s national highways was around 150,000 km (Fig. 7.4) NH44 is the longest national highway in India at 4,112 km. It runs from Srinagar in the north to Kanyakumari in the south. In addition, the
Golden Quadrilateral is an important highway network connecting four of India's major cities — Delhi, Mumbai,
Chennai and Kolkata.
Highways cannot be built everywhere especially in difficult terrains like dense forests, wide river beds, and steep mountains.
In such cases, bridges and tunnels enable ease of access. For instance, the Dhola Sadiya Bridge (or the Bhupen Hazarika Setu)
connects Assam and Arunachal Pradesh across the Lohit River, a tributary of the Brahmaputra. At 9.15 km, it is the second longest bridge in India. Before it was built, people had to rely on ferries for travel, which did not work during floods. Now, the bridge provides year-round travel and has cut travel time by four hours. Farmers can take their vegetables and fruits to the market before they spoil, and people can access hospitals or medicines faster, even during floods.
Another infrastructure marvel closer to nature is the
Meghalaya’s living root bridges which are crafted by the indigeneous Khāsi and Jaintia tribes using the roots of the Ficus
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2 elastica tree or the Indian rubber tree. They guide the roots across streams with bamboo and palm trunks, and over many years the roots grow stronger, twisting into natural bridges.
Some take decades or even centuries to mature and can last for hundreds of years, standing 15–30 m high. These bridges are not just pathways but living and growing structures which have been nurtured over generations. They are a reflection of the knowledge that the local people have about Nature; these bridges have a cultural meaning too, connecting one generation to another.
b) Indian railway network
The British introduced railways in India in 1853 to transport raw materials like cotton and tea to ports for exporting them to
Britain. Railways also helped British goods move across India
Fig. 7.7. Indian railway network during colonial rule 1882
Economic Life Around Us
7 – Infrastructure: Engine of India’s Development and created a market for them. In addition, the system allowed the exploitation of resources and quicker movement of troops, which helped the British ensure tighter control over the vast
Indian territory.
As the railway network expanded, trade grew, major markets developed, and new settlements emerged near stations. Railways became the lifeline for moving people and goods. Today, the
Indian railways carry over 20 million passengers everyday, and is one of the cheapest train services in the world. Cargo trains carry items like coal, grains, textiles, and electronics, using
75–90 per cent less energy than road transport. Earlier, trains used coal and diesel, which caused a lot of pollution. Now, India is aiming to have 100 per cent trains running on electricity by 2025, which is better for the environment, and a huge achievement for the country, see Fig. 7.8.
Indian Railways is also the largest employer with about 1.21 million employees in 2024, including engineers, ticket collectors, and service staff. Additionally, it also creates many indirect jobs like catering, vending, and taxi services.
Fig. 7.8. Percentage of electrified railway networks — country comparisons, 2024
United Kingdom Germany France China India
Fig. 7.9. Food vending at a railway station
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
From 1853 to now, Indian railways have come a long way!
Today, Indian Railways is the fourth-largest railway system in the world.
Fig. 7.10. Indian Railway Network, 2024
Economic Life Around Us
7 – Infrastructure: Engine of India’s Development
1895: F-734, steam locomotive
1957: WDM-1, diesel locomotive
1970: WAM-4, electric locomotive
2019: Vande Bharat train (electric)
1850 1890 2010 2050 1930 1970
Fig. 7.12. Timeline of development of trains in India
Fig. 7.11. Country-wise comparison — length of railway tracks (km) in 2024
0 50000 100000 150000 200000 250000 300000
12345 AB37
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2 c) Metro train systems
Metro trains operate in 23 Indian cities, with a total length of over 1,000 km. The network is expanding and soon India will have the third-largest network in the world, after China and the
USA. They offer fast and reliable travel, easier daily commutes and help reduce road traffic. By running on underground and elevated tracks metro trains cut travel time, and also lower pollution by using cleaner fuels like electricity; some even use solar power, like the Delhi Metro.
LET’S EXPLORE
Have you or your family members ever taken a train or a metro? What sort of economic activities did you see around the stations? Share the experience with your classmates.
d) Air transport
Air transport is the fastest way to connect people and places within and across countries. Passenger flights carry people and cargo flights move high-value or perishable goods like vaccines, chemicals, seafood, etc. These are particularly helpful in delivering aid to people during disasters like floods or earthquakes as they can reach difficult terrains like high mountains, deserts, dense forests, and long oceanic stretches easily.
Fig. 7.14. Commuters inside a metro train Fig. 7.13. A metro train plying its route
Economic Life Around Us
7 – Infrastructure: Engine of India’s Development
Fig. 7.17. Kempegowda International Airport, Bengaluru
DON’T MISS OUT
Æ India has the third-highest domestic air traffic in the world, after the USA and China, and handled around 376 million passengers in 2024–25!
Æ Look at the Kempegowda International Airport in
Bengaluru, Karnataka which is designed based on the concept of ‘garden city’. It is adorned with bamboo structures, plants and vibrant green spaces while also adopting the latest infrastructure to serve passengers.
Fig. 7.15. Machinery for loading cargo into the airplane
Fig. 7.16. Passengers inside an airplane
In 2025, India has 159 airports. Look at some of the international and domestic airports in the map Fig. 7.18. Which airport is closest to your home?
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
Fig. 7.18. Some major airports of India
Kashmir Himachal
Punjab Uttarakhand
Pradesh Rajasthan Bihar
Maharashtra
Meghalaya
Arunachal
Nagaland
Jharkhand
Tamil Nadu
International Airports
National Airports
Karnataka
Chhattisgarh
Lakshadweep
Andaman &
Nicobar Islands
ARABIAN SEA BAY OF BENGAL
1. Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International Airport,
Mumbai, Maharashtra
2. Chennai International Airport, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
3. Dabolim Airport (Goa International Airport), Goa
4. Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi
5. Jaipur International Airport, Jaipur, Rajasthan
6. Kempegowda International Airport, Bengaluru,
Karnataka
7. Navi Mumbai International Airport, Navi Mumbai,
Maharashtra
8. Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose International Airport,
Kolkata, West Bengal
9. Noida International Airport, Jewar, Uttar Pradesh
10. Rajiv Gandhi International Airport, Hyderabad,
Telangana
11. Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel International Airport,
Ahmedabad, Gujarat
A. Darbhanga Airport, Darbhanga, Bihar
B. Dibrugarh Airport, Dibrugarh, Assam
C. Dimapur Airport, Dimapur, Nagaland
D. Diu Airport, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu
E. Kandla Airport, Anjar, Gujarat
F. Kushok Bakula Rimpochee Airport, Leh
G. Ludhiana Airport, Ludhiana, Punjab
H. Maharana Pratap Airport, Udaipur, Rajasthan
I. Pakyong Airport, Pakyong, Sikkim
J. Pantnagar Airport, Pantnagar, Uttarakhand
K. Pathankot Airport, Pathankot, Punjab
L. Puducherry Airport, Puducherry
M. Swami Vivekananda Airport, Raipur, Chhattisgarh
N. Tezu Airport, Tezu, Arunachal Pradesh
LIST OF SOME NATIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL AIRPORTS (numbered in on the map)
Economic Life Around Us
7 – Infrastructure: Engine of India’s Development
Fig. 7.19. Cargo Ship Fig. 7.20. Vishakhapatnam Port, Andhra Pradesh e) Shipping and ports
India's approximately 11,100 km of coastline is connected to regions like West Asia, Africa, and Europe, supporting trade through shipping. As a cheaper mode of transport, ships carry heavy goods like coal, cars, and cement over long distances. Ships dock at ports where goods are loaded and unloaded. India has 12 major ports and 217 minor ports. The volume of cargo handled has increased by 50 per cent in the past decade.
Fig. 7.21. Major container ports in the world by volume of trade (TEU) in 2024*
TEU stands for Twenty-foot Equivalent Units and measures the capacity of container ships and port activity. Generally, 1 TEU =33 cubic metres.
*These numbers need not be memorised by the students.
Shanghai, China 51.51
Singapore 41.12
Busan, South Korea 24.40
Jabel Ali Dubai, UAE 15.54
Port Klang, Malaysia 14.64
Rotterdam, Netherlands 13.82
Antwerp, Belgium 13.50
Los Angeles, USA 10.30
Mumbai, India 7.05
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
Communications Infrastructure
Technology has transformed how we communicate, making it faster and easier through devices like phones, computers, and tablets. Behind this is a communication infrastructure, including cables, wireless devices, towers, satellites, and data centres, that enables transmitting messages, images, and videos. Let us see how communication evolved from slow, manual methods to digital systems with instant global connectivity.
When Rani, from a village in Madhya Pradesh, sends a voice note to her cousin in Tamil Nadu, it feels so simple — just tap, record, send. But have you ever wondered what magical journey that tiny message takes? It’s not just the two phones. First, electricity powers the mobile tower near her village. Then, the message zips through fibre cables buried under fields and roads, gets
Fig. 7.22. Major sea ports of India
Himachal
Punjab Uttarakhand
Haryana Delhi
Pradesh Rajasthan
Maharashtra
Meghalaya
Arunachal
Nagaland
Karnataka
Chhattisgarh
Lakshadweep Andaman &
Nicobar Islands
ARABIAN SEA
BAY OF BENGAL
CHENNAI PORT PORT BLAIR
ENNORE PORT
VISHAKHAPATNAM PORT
KOLKATA PORT
HALDIA PORT
PARADIP PORT
TUTICORIN PORT
NEW MANGALORE PORT
MORMUGAO PORT
KOCHI PORT
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU PORT
MUMBAI PORT
KANDLA PORT
Economic Life Around Us
7 – Infrastructure: Engine of India’s Development transmitted to satellites in space, and travels through giant servers buzzing in distant cities — before finally popping up on her cousin’s phone. A whole invisible world is working together just so one little Namaste can reach across India.
THINK ABOUT IT
Which parts of this process do you think are easiest to see in real life, and which are completely invisible?
Through the advancements in communication, students can access online classes, digital libraries, and educational videos, even in remote areas. It aids emergency response during natural disasters through quick mobile SMS alerts or apps. Small and large businesses sell products across the world through e-commerce. From quick online payments to e-governance where citizens can apply for documents, file complaints, or get information easily, progress in communication infrastructure has promoted ease of living for communities.
Fig. 7.23. Timeline of development of communication systems
200 BCE–1200
CE: Use of pigeons, runners, and horse couriers.
1605: First newspaper printed in Germany
1780: India’s first printed newspaper, the
Bengal Gazette
1800 1830 1860 1890
1844: First electric signal transmitted through the telegraph using dots and dashes for long-distance messaging; invented by
Samuel Morse
1843: First fax machine invented by
Alexander Bain paved the way for sending
1876: Telephone invented by
Alexander
Graham Bell.
1899: J.C. Bose demonstrated wireless transmission
E-commerce:
Buying or selling products and services which are conducted on online platforms or over the internet.
E-governance:
communication technologies by government to deliver services to citizens. For example, the
DigiLocker app to store documents like Aadhaar card and driving license online.
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
DON’T MISS OUT
J.C. Bose — The man who invented wireless transmission
J
