Ganita Prakash | Grade 6
4. Write the names of a few trees you see around you. When you observe a tree on the way from your home to school (or while walking from one place to another place), record the data and fill in the following table:
Tree No. of Trees a. Which tree was found in the greatest number?
b. Which tree was found in the smallest number?
c. Were there any two trees found in the same numbers?
5. Take a blank piece of paper and paste any small news item from a newspaper. Each student may use a different article. Now, prepare a table on the piece of paper as given below. Count the number of each of the letters ‘c’, ‘e’, ‘i’, ‘r’, and ‘x’ in the words of the news article, and fill in the table.
Letter c e i r x Any other letter of your choice
Number of times found in the news item a. The letter found the most number of times is ________.
b. The letter found the least number of times is ________.
c. List the five letters ‘c’, ‘e’, ‘i’, ‘r’, ‘x’ in ascending order of frequency. Now, compare the order of your list with that of your classmates. Is your order the same or nearly the same as theirs? (Almost everyone is likely to get the order ‘x, c, r, i, e’.) Why do you think this is the case?
Reprint 2026-27
Data Handling and Presentation d. Write the process you followed to complete this task.
e. Discuss with your friends the processes they followed.
f. If you do this task with another news item, what process would you follow?
Provide more opportunities to collect and organise data. Ask students to guess what is the most popular colour, game, toy, school subject, etc., amongst the students in their classroom and then collect the data for it. It can be a fun activity in which they also learn about their classmates. Discuss how they can organise the data in different ways, each way having its own advantages and limitations. For all these tasks and the tasks under ‘Figure it Out’, discuss the tasks with the children and let them understand the tasks, and then let them plan and present their research processes and conclusions in the class.
Teacher’s Note
4.2 Pictographs
Pictographs are one visual and suggestive way to represent data without writing any numbers. Look at this picture — you may be familiar with it from previous classes.
Modes of Travelling Number of Students = 1 Student
Private car
Public bus
School bus
This picture helps you understand at a glance the different modes of travel used by students. Based on this picture, answer the following questions:
Reprint 2026-27
Ganita Prakash | Grade 6
• Which mode of travel is used by the most number of students?
• Which mode of travel is used by the least number of students?
A pictograph represents data through pictures of objects. It helps answer questions about data with just a quick glance.
In the above pictograph, one unit or symbol ( ) is used to represent one student. There are also other pictographs where one unit or symbol stands for many people or objects.
Example: Nand Kishor collected responses from the children of his middle school in Berasia regarding how often they slept at least
9 hours during the night. He prepared a pictograph from the data:
Response Number of Children ( = 10 Children)
Sometimes
Answer the following questions using the pictograph:
1. What is the number of children who always slept at least 9 hours at night?
2. How many children sometimes slept at least 9 hours at night?
3. How many children always slept less than 9 hours each night?
Explain how you got your answer.
Solutions
1. In the table, there are 5 pictures for ‘Always’. Each picture represents 10 children. Therefore, 5 pictures indicate
5 × 10 = 50 children.
2. There are 2 complete pictures (2 × 10 = 20) and a half picture (half of 10 = 5). Therefore, the number of children who sleep at least 9 hours only sometimes is 20 + 5 = 25.
Reprint 2026-27
Data Handling and Presentation
3. There are 4 complete pictures for ‘Never’. Hence, 4 × 10 =
40 children never sleep at least 9 hours in a night, i.e., they always sleep less than 9 hours.
Drawing a Pictograph
One day, Lakhanpal collected data on how many students were absent in each class:
Class I II III IV V VI VII VIII students 3 5 4 2 0 1 5 7
He created a pictograph to present this data and decided to show
1 student as in the pictograph —
No. of students absent
= 1 student
Meanwhile, his friends Jarina and Sangita collected data on how many students were present in each class:
Class I II III IV V VI VII VIII students 30 35 20 25 30 25 30 20
Reprint 2026-27
Ganita Prakash | Grade 6
If they want to show their data through a pictograph, where they also use one symbol for each student, as Lakhanpal did, what are the challenges they might face?
Jarina made a plan to address this — since there were many students, she decided to use to represent 5 students. She figured that would save time and space too.
No. of students present
= 5 students
Sangita decided to use one to represent 10 students instead.
Since she used one to show 10 students, she had a problem in showing 25 students and 35 students in the pictograph. Then, she realised she could use to show 5 students.
No. of students present
= 10 students
Reprint 2026-27
Data Handling and Presentation
What could be the problems faced in preparing such a pictograph, if the total number of students present in a class is 33 or 27?
• Pictographs are a nice visual and suggestive way to represent data. They represent data through pictures of objects.
• Pictographs can help answer questions and make inferences about data with just a quick glance (in the examples above— about favourite games, favourite colours, most common modes of conveyance, number of students absent, etc.).
• By reading a pictograph, we can quickly understand the frequencies of the different categories (for example, cricket, hockey, etc.) and the comparisons of these frequencies.
• In a pictograph, the categories can be arranged horizontlly or vertically. For each category, simple pictures and symbols are then drawn in the designated columns or rows according to the frequency of that category.
• A scale or key (for example, : 1 student or : 5 students)
is added to show what each symbol or picture represents. Each symbol or picture can represent one unit or multiple units.
• It can be more challenging to prepare a pictograph when the amount of data is large or when the frequencies are not exact multiples of the scale or key.
Figure it Out
1. The following pictograph shows the number of books borrowed by students, in a week, from the library of Middle School,
Ginnori:
Reprint 2026-27
Ganita Prakash | Grade 6
Day Number of Books Borrowed ( =1 Book )
Wednesday
Thursday
Saturday a. On which day were the minimum number of books borrowed?
b. What was the total number of books borrowed during the c. On which day were the maximum number of books borrowed?
What may be the possible reason?
2. Magan Bhai sells kites at Jamnagar. Six shopkeepers from nearby villages come to purchase kites from him. The number of kites he sold to these six shopkeepers are given below —
Shopkeeper Number of Kites Sold
Chaman 250
Rani 300
Rukhsana 100
Jasmeet 450
Jetha Lal 250
Poonam Ben 700
Reprint 2026-27
Data Handling and Presentation
Prepare a pictograph using the symbol to represent 100 kites.
Answer the following questions:
a. How many symbols represent the kites that Rani purchased?
b. Who purchased the maximum number of kites?
c. Who purchased more kites, Jasmeet or Chaman?
d. Rukhsana says Poonam Ben purchased more than double the number of kites that Rani purchased. Is she correct? Why?
4.3 Bar Graphs
Have you seen graphs like this on TV or in a newspaper?
Like pictographs, such bar graphs can help us to quickly understand and interpret information, such as the highest value, the comparison of values of different categories, etc.
However, when the amount of data is large, presenting it by a pictograph is not only time consuming but at times difficult too. Let us see how data can be presented instead using a bar graph.
Let’s take the data collected by Lakhanpal earlier, regarding the number of students absent on one day in each class:
Class I II III IV V VI VII VIII students 3 5 4 2 0 1 5 7
Source: https://www.statista.com/chart/17122/ number-of-threatened-species-red-list/
Reprint 2026-27
Ganita Prakash | Grade 6
He presented the same data using a bar graph:
1 unit length = 1 student
Number of students
No. of students absent in each class
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
If the students have not noticed, please point out the equally spaced horizontal lines. Explain that this means that each pair of consecutive numbers on the left has the same gap.
Teacher’s Note
Answer the following questions using the bar graph:
1. In Class 2, ___________ students were absent that day.
2. In which class were the maximum number of students absent?
___________
3. Which class had full attendance that day? ___________
When making bar graphs, bars of uniform width can be drawn horizontally or vertically with equal spacing between them; then the
Reprint 2026-27
Data Handling and Presentation length or height of each bar represents the given number. As we saw in pictographs, we can use a scale or key when the frequencies are larger.
Let us look at an example of vehicular traffic at a busy road crossing in Delhi, which was studied by the traffic police on a particular day.
The number of vehicles passing through the crossing each hour from
6 a.m. to 12:00 noon is shown in the bar graph. One unit of length stands for 100 vehicles.
Time intervals
Number of vehicles
We can see that the maximum traffic at the crossing is shown by the longest bar, i.e., for the time interval 7–8 a.m. The bar graph shows that 1200 vehicles passed through the crossing at that time.
The second longest bar is for 8–9 a.m. During that time, 1000 vehicles passed through the crossing. Similarly, the minimum traffic is shown by the smallest bar, i.e., the bar for the time interval 6–7 a.m. During that time, only about 150 vehicles passed through the crossing. The second smallest bar is that for the time interval 11 a.m.–12 noon, when about 600 vehicles passed through the crossing.
The total number of cars passing through the crossing during the two-hour interval 8.00–10.00 a.m. as shown by the bar graph is about
1000 + 800 = 1800 vehicles.
Reprint 2026-27
Ganita Prakash | Grade 6
Figure it Out
1. How many total cars passed through the crossing between 6 a.m.
and noon?
2. Why do you think so little traffic occurred during the hour of
6–7 a.m., as compared to the other hours from 7 a.m.–noon?
3. Why do you think the traffic was the heaviest between 7–8 a.m.?
4. Why do you think the traffic was lesser and lesser each hour after
8 a.m. all the way until noon?
Example:
Population of India in crores
This bar graph shows the population of India in each decade over a period of 50 years. The numbers are expressed in crores. If you were to take 1 unit length to represent one person, drawing the bars will
Reprint 2026-27
Data Handling and Presentation be difficult! Therefore, we choose the scale so that 1 unit represents
10 crores. The bar graph for this choice is shown in the figure. So a bar of length 5 units represents 50 crores and of 8 units represents
80 crores.
• On the basis of this bar graph, what may be a few questions you may ask your friends?
• How much did the population of India increase over 50 years?
How much did the population increase in each decade?
4.4 Drawing a Bar Graph
In a previous example, Shri Nilesh prepared a frequency table representing the sweet preferences of the students in his class. Let’s try to prepare a bar graph to present his data —
1. First, we draw a horizontal line and a vertical line. On the horizontal line, we will write the name of each of the sweets, equally spaced, from which the bars will rise in accordance with their frequencies; and on the vertical line we will write the frequencies representing the number of students.
2. We must choose a scale. That means we must decide how many students will be represented by a unit length of a bar so that it fits nicely on our paper. Here, we will take 1 unit length to represent 1 student.
3. For jalebi, we therefore need to draw a bar having a height of 6 units (which is the frequency of the sweet jalebi), and similarly for the other sweets we have to draw bars as high as their frequencies.
Sweet No. of Students
Jalebi 6
Gulab jamun 9
Gujiya 13
Rasgulla 7
Reprint 2026-27
Ganita Prakash | Grade 6
4. We, therefore, get a bar graph as shown below —
Sweet preferences of students
Number of students
Jalebi Gulab jamun Gujia Barfi Rasgulla
When the frequencies are larger and we cannot use the scale of
1 unit length = 1 number (frequency), we need to choose a different scale like we did in the case of pictographs.
Example: The number of runs scored by Smriti in each of the
8 matches are given in the table below:
Match Match
Runs 80 50 10 100 90 0 90 50
In this example, the minimum score is 0 and the maximum score is 100. Using a scale of 1 unit length = l run would mean that we have to go all the way from 0 to 100 runs in steps of l. This would be unnecessarily tedious. Instead, let us use a scale where 1 unit length = 10 runs. We mark this scale on the vertical line and draw the bars according to the scores in each match. We get the following bar graph representing the above data.
Reprint 2026-27
Data Handling and Presentation
Match 1 Match 2 Match 3 Match 4 Match 5 Match 6 Match 7 Match 8
Runs scored by Smriti
Example: The following table shows the monthly expenditure of
Imran’s family on various items:
Items Expenditure (in `)
House rent
Education
Electricity
Transport
Miscellaneous
To represent this data in the form of a bar graph, here are the steps —
• Draw two perpendicular lines, one horizontal and one vertical.
• Along the horizontal line, mark the ‘items’ with equal spacing between them and mark the corresponding expenditures along the vertical line.
Reprint 2026-27
Ganita Prakash | Grade 6
• Take bars of the same width, keeping a uniform gap between them.
• Choose a suitable scale along the vertical line. Let, 1 unit length =
` 200, and then mark and write the corresponding values (` 200,
` 400, etc.) representing each unit length.
Finally, calculate the heights of the bars for various items as shown below —
House rent
Education
Electricity
Transport
Miscellaneous
3000 ÷ 200
3400 ÷ 200
800 ÷ 200
400 ÷ 200
600 ÷ 200
1200 ÷ 200
15 units
17 units
Here is the bar graph that we obtain based on the above steps:
Expenditure ( in
House rent
Education
Electricity
Transport
Miscellaneous
Reprint 2026-27
Data Handling and Presentation
Use the bar graph to answer the following questions:
1. On which item does Imran’s family spend the most and the second most?
2. Is the cost of electricity about one-half the cost of education?
3. Is the cost of education less than one-fourth the cost of food?
Figure it Out
1. Samantha visited a tea garden, and collected data of the insects and critters she saw there. Here is the data she collected:
Mites Caterpillars Beetles Butterflies Grasshoppers
6 10 5 3 2
Help her prepare a bar graph representing this data.
2. Pooja collected data on the number of tickets sold at the Bhopal railway station for a few different cities of Madhya Pradesh over a two-hour period.
City Vidisha Jabalpur Seoni Indore Sagar
Number of tickets 24 20 16 28 16
She used this data and prepared a bar graph on the board to discuss the data with her students, but someone erased a portion of the graph.
Reprint 2026-27
Ganita Prakash | Grade 6
Vidisha Jabalpur Seoni Indore Sagar
No. of Tickets a. Write the number of tickets sold for Vidisha above the bar.
b. Write the number of tickets sold for Jabalpur above the bar.
c. The bar for Vidisha is 6 unit lengths and the bar for Jabalpur is 5 unit lengths. What is the scale for this graph?
d. Draw the correct bar for Sagar.
e. Add the scale of the bar graph by placing the correct numbers on the vertical axis.
f. Are the bars for Seoni and Indore correct in this graph? If not, draw the correct bar(s).
3. Chinu listed the various means of transport that passed across the road in front of his house from 9 a.m. to 10 a.m.:
bike car bike bus bike bike bike auto rickshaw bicycle bullock bicycle auto rickshaw car scooter car auto rickshaw bicycle bike car auto rickshaw bike scooter bike car bicycle scooter bicycle scooter bike bus auto rickshaw auto rickshaw bike bicycle bus bike bicycle scooter bus scooter auto rickshaw scooter bicycle bike bullock rickshaw car scooter
Reprint 2026-27
Data Handling and Presentation a. Prepare a frequency distribution table for the data.
b. Which means of transport was used the most?
c. If you were there to collect this data, how could you do it?
Write the steps or process.
4. Roll a die 30 times and record the number you obtain each time.
Prepare a frequency distribution table using tally marks. Find the number that appeared:
a. The minimum number of times.
b. The maximum number of times.
c. Find numbers that appeared an equal number of times.
5. Faiz prepared a frequency distribution table of data on the number of wickets taken by Jaspreet Bumrah in his last 30 matches:
Wickets Taken Number of Matches a. What information is this table giving?
b. What may be the title of this table?
c. What caught your attention in this table?
d. In how many matches has Bumrah taken 4 wickets?
Reprint 2026-27
Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 e. Mayank says, “If we want to know the total number of wickets he has taken in his last 30 matches, we have to add the numbers 0, 1, 2, 3 …, up to 7.” Can Mayank get the total number of wickets taken in this way? Why?
f. How would you correctly figure out the total number of wickets taken by Bumrah in his last 30 matches, using this
6. The following pictograph shows the number of tractors in five different villages.
Villages Number of Tractors ( = 1 Tractor )
Village A
Village B
Village C
Village D
V
