Ganita Prakash | Grade 6
Year Number of Tigers (approx.)
2006 1400
2010 1700
2014 2200
2018 3000
2022 3700
Number of Tigers in India
Number of Tigers
0 1000 2000 3000 4000
• Like pictographs, bar graphs give a nice visual way to represent data. They represent data through equally-spaced bars, each of equal width, where the lengths or heights give frequencies of the different categories.
• Each category is represented by a bar where the length or height depicts the corresponding frequency (for example, cost) or quantity (for example, runs).
• The bars have uniform spaces between them to indicate that they are free standing and represent equal categories.
• The bars help in interpreting data much faster than a frequency table. By reading a bar graph, we can compare frequencies of different categories at a glance.
• We must decide the scale (for example, 1 unit length = 1 student or 1 unit length = ` 200) for a bar graph on the basis of the data including the minimum and maximum frequencies, so that the resulting bar graph fits nicely and looks visually appealing on the paper or poster we are preparing. The markings of the unit lengths as per the scale must start from zero.
Teacher’s Note
The main focus of this chapter is to learn how to handle data to find answers to specific questions or inquiries, to test hypotheses or to take specific decisions. This should be kept in mind when providing practice opportunities to collect, organise and analyse data.
Reprint 2026-27
Data Handling and Presentation
4.5 Artistic and Aesthetic Considerations
In addition to the steps described in previous sections, there are also some other more artistic and aesthetic aspects one can consider when preparing visual presentations of data to make them more interesting and effective. First, when making a visual presentation of data such as a pictograph or bar graph, it is important to make it fit in the intended space; this can be controlled, for example, by choosing the scale appropriately, as we have seen earlier. It is also desirable to make the data presentation visually appealing and easy-to-understand, so that the intended audience appreciates the information being conveyed.
Let us consider an example. Here is a table naming the tallest mountain on each continent, along with the height of each mountain in meters.
Continent Asia South
America Africa Europe Antarctica Australia
Mountain Everest Aconcagua Denali Kiliman- jaro Elbrus Vinson
Massif Koscuiszko
Height 8848m 6962m 6194m 5895m 5642m 4892m 2228m
How much taller is Mount Everest than Mount Koscuiszko? Are
Mount Denali and Mount Kilimanjaro very different in height? This is not so easy to quickly discern from a large table of numbers.
As we have seen earlier, we can convert the table of numbers into a bar graph, as shown on the right. Here, each value is drawn as a horizontal box. These are longer or shorter depending on the number they represent. This makes it easier to compare the heights of all these mountains at a glance.
Reprint 2026-27
Ganita Prakash | Grade 6
Asia — Everest
South America — Aconcagua
North America — Denali
Africa — Kilimanjaro
Europe — Elbrus
Antarctica — Vinson Massif
Australia — Koscuiszko
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000
However, since the boxes represent heights, it is better and more visually appealing to rotate the picture, so that the boxes grow upward, vertically from the ground like mountains. A bar graph with vertical bars is also called a column graph. Columns are the pillars you find in a building that hold up the roof.
Below is a column graph for our table of tallest mountains. From this column graph, it becomes easier to compare and visualise the heights of the mountains.
South America
Aconcagua
North America
Kilimanjaro
Antarctica
Vinson Massif
Australia
Koscuiszko
Reprint 2026-27
Data Handling and Presentation
In general, it is more intuitive, suggestive and visually appealing to represent heights, that are measured upwards from the ground, using bar graphs that have vertical bars or columns. Similarly, lengths that are parallel to the ground (for example, distances between location on Earth) are usually best represented using bar graphs with horizontal arcs.
Figure it Out
1. If you wanted to visually represent the data of the heights of the tallest persons in each class in your school, would you use a graph with vertical bars or horizontal bars? Why?
2. If you were making a table of the longest rivers on each continent and their lengths, would you prefer to use a bar graph with vertical bars or with horizontal bars? Why? Try finding out this information, and then make the corresponding table and bar graph! Which continents have the longest rivers?
Infographics
When data visualisations such as bar graphs are further beautified with more extensive artistic and visual imagery, they are called information graphics or infographics for short. The aim of infographics is to make use of attention-attracting and engaging visuals to communicate information even more clearly and quickly, in a visually pleasing way.
As an example of how infographics can be used to communicate data even more suggestively, let us go back to the table above listing the tallest mountain on each continent. We drew a bar graph with vertical bars (columns) rather than horizontal bars, to be more indicative of mountains. But instead of rectangles, we could use triangles, which look a bit more like mountains. And, we can add a splash of colour as well. Here is the result.
Reprint 2026-27
Ganita Prakash | Grade 6
Aconcagua
S America
Kilimanjaro
Vinson Massif
Antarctica
Koscuiszko
Australia
While this infographic might look more appealing and suggestive at first glance, it does have some issues. The goal of our bar graph earlier was to represent the heights of various mountains — using bars of the appropriate heights but the same widths. The purpose of using the same widths was to make it clear that we are only comparing heights.
However, in this infographic, the taller triangles are also wider! Are taller mountains always wider? The infographic is implying additional information that may be misleading and may or may not be correct.
Sometimes going for more appealing pictures can also accidentally mislead.
Taking this idea further, and to make the picture even more visually stimulating and suggestive, we can further change the shapes of the mountains to make them look even more like mountains, and add other details, while attempting to preserve the heights. For example, we can create an imaginary mountain range that contains all these mountains.
Is the infographic below better than the column graph with rectangular columns of equal width? The mountains look more realistic, but is the picture accurate?
For example, Everest appears to be twice as tall as Elbrus.
Reprint 2026-27
Data Handling and Presentation
The seven highest peaks on the seven continents.
What is 5642 × 2?
While preparing visually-appealing presentations of data, we also need to be careful that the pictures we draw do not mislead us about the facts. In general, it is important to be careful when making or reading infographics, so that we do not mislead our intended audiences and we, ourselves, are not misled.
S u m m a r y
 Facts, numbers, measures, observations and other descriptions of things that convey information about those things is called data.
 Data can be organised in a tabular form using tally marks for easy analysis and interpretation.
 Frequencies are the counts of the occurrences of values, measures or observations.
Reprint 2026-27
Ganita Prakash | Grade 6
 Pictographs represent data in the form of pictures, or objects or parts of objects. Each picture represents a frequency which can be 1 or more than 1 — this is called the scale and it must be specified.
 Bar graphs have bars of uniform width; the length or height that indicates the total frequency of occurrence. The scale that is used to convert length or height to frequency again, must be specified.
 Choosing the appropriate scale for a pictograph or bar graph is important to accurately and effectively convey the desired information or data and to also make it visually appealing.
 Other aspects of a graph also contribute to its effectiveness and visual appeal such as how colours are used, what accompanying pictures are drawn, and whether the bars are horizontal or vertical. These aspects correspond to the artistic and aesthetic side of data handling and presentation.
 However, making visual representations of data ‘fancy’ can also sometimes be misleading.
 By reading pictographs and bar graphs accurately, we can quickly understand and make inferences about the data presented.
Reprint 2026-27
CHAPTER 4 — SOLUTIONS
Data Handling and Presentation
Section 4.1
Page No. 75
Figure it Out
Q.1. What would you do to find the most popular game among Naresh’s and Navya’s classmates?
Ans. One of the ways could be to arrange and organize the given data in a table. Think of some other ways.
Q.2. What is the most popular game in their class?
Ans. Hockey (frequency – 8).
Q.4. Pari wants to respond to the questions given below. Put a tick () for the questions where she needs to carry out data collection and put a cross (⨉) for the questions where she doesn’t need to collect data. Discuss your answers in the classroom.
a. What is the most popular TV show among her classmates?
b. When did India get independence?
c. How much water is getting wasted in her locality?
d. What is the capital of India?
Page No. 76
Figure it Out
Q.1. Complete the table to help Shri Nilesh to purchase the correct numbers of sweets:
• How many students chose jalebi?
• Barfi was chosen by students?
• How many students chose gujiya?
• Rasgulla was chosen by students?
• How many students chose gulab jamun?
Shri Nilesh requested one of the staff members to bring the sweets as given in the table.
The above table helped him to purchase the correct numbers of sweets.
Q.2. Is the above table sufficient to distribute each type of sweet to the correct student?
Explain. If it is not sufficient, what is the alternative?
Ans. No.
It shows only the number of students who chose a particular sweet, and not about the sweet chosen by a particular student.
One of the alternatives could be, students should be categorized according to their choice of sweet.
Section 4.1
Page No. 77
Figure it Out
Q.1. Help her to figure out the following –
• The largest shoe size in the class is _________
• The smallest shoe size in the class is _________
• There are _________ students who wear shoe size 5.
• There are _________ students who wear shoe sizes larger than 4.
Q.2. How did arranging the data in ascending order help to answer these questions?
Ans. Ordered data is helpful because in this form, frequency of any data is easy to count and the given information can be used easily.
Q.3. Are there other ways to arrange the data?
Ans. Yes, the data can be arranged in a frequency table.
Section 4.2
Page No. 83
Q. What could be the problems faced in preparing such a pictograph, if the total number of students present in a class is 33 or 27?
Ans. represents 10 students and represent 5 students. But to represent 3 or 7 students accurately by dividing these symbols is not possible.
Figure it Out
Q.1. The following pictograph shows the number of books borrowed by students, in a week, from the library of Middle School, Ginnori — a. On which day were the minimum number of books borrowed?
b. What was the total number of books borrowed during the week?
c. On which day were the maximum number of books borrowed? What may be the possible reason?
Ans. a. Thursday c. Saturday. One of the reasons could be that Sunday being a holiday students can read the borrowed books on Sunday.
Q.2. Magan Bhai sells kites at Jamnagar. Six shopkeepers from nearby villages come to purchase kites from him. The number of kites he sold to these six shopkeepers are given below —
Prepare a pictograph using the symbol to represent 100 kites.
Shopkeeper No. of Kites sold ( =100
Rukhsana
Jetha Lal
Poonam Ben
Answer the following questions:
a. How many symbols represent the kites that Rani purchased?
b. Who purchased the maximum number of kites?
c. Who purchased more kites, Jasmeet or Chaman?
d. Rukhsana says Poonam Ben purchased more than double the number of kites that Rani purchased. Is she correct? Why?
Ans. a. 3 symbols b. Poonam Ben c. Jasmeet d. Yes. Number. of kites purchased by Poonam Ben = 700 = 2 x 300 +100
Section 4.3
Page no. 86
Q1. In Class 2, ___________ students were absent that day.
Q2. In which class were the maximum number of students absent? ___________
Ans. Class 8
Q3. Which class had full attendance that day? ___________
Ans. Class 5
Page no. 88
Figure it Out
Q.1. How many total cars passed through the crossing between 6 am and noon?
Ans. 4450 cars
Section 4.4
Page No. 93
Q. On which item does Imran’s family spend the most and the second most?
Ans. Imran’s family spends the most on food and the second most on house rent.
Q.2. Is the cost of electricity about one-half the cost of education?
Ans. Yes,
Q.3. Is the cost of education less than one-fourth the cost of food?
Ans. Yes. Cost of education = Rs. 800 and cost of food = Rs 3400 =4 x Rs 850
So, cost of education = less than one-fourth of cost of food.
Figure it Out
Q.1. Samantha visited a tea garden and collected data of the insects and critters she saw there. Here is the data she collected —
Help her prepare a bar graph representing this data.
Q.2. Pooja collected data on the number of tickets sold at the Bhopal railway station for a few different cities of Madhya Pradesh over a 2-hour period.
She used this data and prepared a bar graph on the board to discuss the data with her students, but someone erased a portion of the graph.
a. Write the number of tickets sold for Vidisha above the bar.
b. Write the number of tickets sold for Jabalpur above the bar.
c. The bar for Vidisha is 6 unit lengths and the bar for Jabalpur is 5 unit lengths.
What is the scale for this graph?
d. Draw the correct bar for Sagar.
e. Add the scale of the bar graph placing the correct numbers on the vertical axis.
f. Are the bars for Seoni and Indore correct in this graph? If not, draw the correct
Ans. a. 24 c. 1unit length = 4 tickets f. The bar for Seoni is correct but for Indore is incorrect.
Q.3. Chinu listed the various means of transport that passed across the road in front of his house from 9 am to 10 am:
a. Prepare a frequency distribution table for the data.
b. Which means of transport was used the most?
c. If you were there to collect this data, how could you do it? Write the steps or process.
Means of Transport Number
Bicycle 8
Auto Rickshaw 8
Scooter 9
Bullock Cart 2 c. To collect the data of various means of transport, one of the ways could be – (i) Prepare a table with 2 columns. First for means of transport and second for its frequency.
(ii) List the various means of transport as they pass across the road.
(iii) Frequency should be presented using tally marks.
Q.5. Faiz prepared a frequency distribution table of data on the number of wickets taken by Jaspreet Bumrah in his last 30 matches:
a. What information is this table giving?
b. What may be the title of this table?
c. What caught your attention in this table?
d. In how many matches has Bumrah taken 4 wickets?
e. Mayank says “If we want to know the total number of wickets he has taken in his last 30 matches, we have to add the numbers 0, 1, 2, 3 …, up to 7.” Can Mayank get the total number of wickets taken in this way? Why?
f. How would you correctly figure out the total number of wickets taken by Bumrah in his last 30 matches, using this table?
Ans. a. This table is giving the information about different number of wickets taken by
Jaspreet Bumrah in different number of matches.
b. The title of this table may be: Wickets Taken by Jaspreet Bumrah in Last 30
Matches.(think of more!)
c. In this table, attention seeking point is that in 1 match 7 wickets were taken by
Jaspreet Bumrah only.(think of more!)
d. In 3 matches Bumrah has taken 4 wickets.
e. No, Mayank can’t get the total number of wickets taken in this way. For example, 3 wickets per match were taken in 8 matches, which means total 24 wickets were taken.
f. To know the total number of wickets, prepare a next column of total wickets .It will have products of corresponding numbers of the two given columns. Then the sum of the numbers in the 3rd column, will be the total number of wickets. Total number of wickets =90
Q.6. The following pictograph shows the number of tractors in five different villages.
Observe the pictograph and answer the following questions— a. Which village has the smallest number of tractors?
b. Which village has the most tractors?
c. How many more tractors does Village C have than Village B?
d. Komal says, “Village D has half the number of tractors as Village E.” Is she right?
Ans. a. Village D.
b. Village C.
Q.7. The number of girl students in each class of a school is depicted by a pictograph:
Observe this pictograph and answer the following questions:
a. Which class has the least number of girl students?
b. What is the difference between the number of girls in Classs 5 and 6?
c. If 2 more girls were admitted in Class 2, how would the graph change?
d. How many girls are there in Class 7?
Ans. a. Class 8.
c. If 2 more girls were admitted in class 2, the last half symbol will be converted into full symbol.
Q.8. Mudhol Hounds (a type of breed of Indian dogs) are largely found in North
Karnataka’s Bagalkote and Vijaypura districts. The government took an initiative to protect this breed by providing support to those who adopted these dogs. Due to this initiative, the number of these dogs increased. The number of Mudhol dogs in six villages of Karnataka are as follows —
Village A : 18, Village B : 36, Village C : 12, Village D : 48, Village E : 18, Village F : 24
Prepare a pictograph and answer
